
      
         
            
            
            ¶A ſchole of wiſe Conceytes, Wherein as euery Conceyte hath wit, ſo the moſt haue much mirth, Set forth in common places by order of the Alphabet.
            
            Tranſlated out of diuers Greeke and Latine Wryters, by THOMAS BLAGE ſtudent, of the Queenes Colledge in Cambridge.
            
               Printed at London, by Henrie Binneman. Anno. 1572.
            CVM PRIVILEGIO.
         
         
            
            The names of the Authors vſed in this Booke.
            
               LAurentius Abſtemius.
               Aulus Gellius.
               Plinius Secundus Nouocomenſis.
               Nicolaus Gerbellius Phorcenſis.
               Petrus Crinitus.
               Angelus Politianus.
               Aeſopus.
               Gabrias.
               Guilielmus Goudanus.
               Anianus.
               Ioannes Antonius Campanus.
               Horatius.
               Gerardus Levv.
               Poggius.
               Bebelius.
               Braſitanus.
               Adrianus Barlandus.
               Eraſmus Roterodamus.
               Hermannus.
               Rimitius.
            
         
         
            
            To the gentle Reader, in the commendation of Fables.
            
               AS I reuolued in my minde the ſundrie kindes of vvriters, vvhich for the profit of mā haue put in remē
               brance their imaginations, they that haue vvrit Fables are to be accounted vvith the reſte: for they haue not onely vvonderfully delighted the harts of men, but alſo haue more allured them to doe thinges both good and profitable vvith their Fables, than Philoſophers vvith their preceptes. For they vvith ſuche a ſvveetneſſe do ſo pierce the hartes of the Readers, and by ſimilitudes do declare (vvhich are of muche force to moue affection) vvhat mē ought to take, and vvhat to refuſe, that thereby they are compelled, againſt their vvils to agree vnto them. For the minde is diſdaynfull to heare, neyther vvill it eaſely abyde things profitable and honeſt, excepte they be poudered vvith ſome merry ieſte. Hereunto beareth vvitneſſe a certein Orator of Athens, vvho on a tyme ſpeaking to the Athenians, vvhen he perceyued them leſſe attentiue, required them that they vvoulde vouchſafe to heare a Fable: they vvere contented: then he began thus: Ceres, the Svvallovve and the Egle ſometyme iorneyed togither, vvhen they vvere come to a riuer, the

Svvallovve flue ouer, and the Eele ſvvam through the ryuer: vvhen he had ſo ſaide he helde his peace: then they asked him vvhat Ceres did? Your Gods (quod he) are offended at you vvhich vvil not hear them that counſell you for your profit, but if they tell any tales yee heare them vvillingly. VVhat force fables are of to moue affection, I coulde declare by many examples, yet vvill I propound but three. The inhabitants of Samos vvould haue put their ruler to death, vvhome Aeſope diſſuaded, ſaying: As a Fox paſſed ouer a riuer he vvas driuen into a ditche vvhere he ſtucke faſt in the mudde, that he could not eſcape, vvhome the Flies ſtinged, the hedgehog ſeing him ther, moued vvith compaſſiō, asked him if he shoulde driue the Flies from him. No (quod he) for theſe are full vvith my bloud and can litle trouble me, but if thou shouldeſt driue thē avvay, other hunger ſterued flies vvil occupie their romes, and ſuck out al the bloud that is lefte vvithin me. The like shall happen to you O Samians, for if ye ſlay your Ruler vvhich is ſo vvealthie, ye muſt needs choſe others, vvhich vvhiles they enriche thē ſelues, shall poll you of all that this man hath lefte: vvherevvithall the Samians being moued, lefte off their purpoſe. By the like meanes vvas Tiberius Caeſar perſuaded, vvhen he appointed for euery day Magiſtrates, vvherevppon (as Joſephus telleth) the countrie of Jurie vvas gouerned by Cratus and Pilatus onely by the ſpace of tvventie yeares. For

(as Statius ſayth) hee that ruleth but a litle vvhile, shevveth ſmall fauour to the people. The Himerians ſometime minded to chooſe Captaine of their armie, Phalaris the tyrant of Agrigentum, vvhom Steſichorus the Poet vvith this Fable diſcouraged from their purpoſe, ſaying. A horſe fed alone in a medovve, at length came a Harte thither and ſpoyled it: vvhervpon the horſe toke the aduiſe of man, by vvhat meane he might be reuenged, to vvhome the man ſayde: If thou vvilt take a bit in thy mouth and ſuffer me armed to get vpon thy backe, vvhoſe counſel he follovved, and by his helpe put the harte to flight and became the conquerer, but from that time forth he could not rid his mouth from the bit nor the mā from his backe. Euen ſo (ſayde Steſichorus) the like shall happen to you, if ye choſe Phalaris your captaine, for your enimies ye shall ſubdue but ye shal be in bondage to this Tyraunt for euer: vvith vvhich vvordes the Himerians being diſcouraged, forſoke the counſel to choſe ſuch a captaine. VVhat time the people of Rome ſeparated them ſelues from the Senators, bicauſe they payd tribute and vvere combred vvith vvarfares, did not Agrippa Minenius turne them from their purpoſe vvith this fable? Sometime (quoth he) ye Romaines, the members of man perceiuing the belly to be ſlouthfull, fell at variance vvith hir & determined to giue her no longer any ſuccor. It happened, that bicauſe they denied her nourishment, they became faynt,

vvhervpon they vver at one again. In like maner the Senate and people of Rome are as the belly and members, vvhich neede one of anothers helpe, and as by diſcord they perishe, ſo by concord they are of ſtrength: By vvhich tale the people turned from their purpoſe and became friends againe vvith the Senate. Therfore not vvithout good cauſe both the Greeke and Latin Poets, as Heſiodus and Horace, haue mingled ſuche Fables amongſt their vvorkes, and alſo the chiefeſt and famous Philoſophers, as Plato, Aristotle, and Plutarche, vvith many moe, haue highly commended them, vvhoſe opiniō vvas, that they much auayled to the inſtruction of a morall and ciuill life: vvherfore Leouicenus and 
                  Ʋalla, of late vvriters the beſt learned, did tranſlate Fables out of Greke into Latin, vvhich they knevv vvould be to their praiſe, and to the delight and profite of others: Neither vvere they deceyued, for they are daily red of moſt learned mē. I cā not therfore perceiue, vvhy by tranſlating theſe Fables, I should be defrauded of the prayſe due to me, vvhich other haue had, except vve bee ſo ſpitefull, that to vs that is not lavvfull, vvhich vvith great cōmendatiō to the Grecians and Latiniſtes is allovved. Farevvell.
         
         
            
            ¶A Dialogue betwene the Author and the Printer.
            
               Author.
               AS I did muſing lie, with ſundrie thoughtes oppreſt,
               Séeking to ſalue my carefull minde, of paine to be redreſt:
               And pondring how my youth full ydlely I had ſpent,
               In ſcilence only wrapped vp, my minde it did torment.
               From darkneſſe vnto lyght I thought it beſt to call,
               By ſetting forth ſome little booke which profite might vs all.
               And that I did intende is brought now to effect.
               At ydle houres I did it penne as time would me direct.
               The worke you plainely ſée, friende Printer what it is,
               Declare if printing it deſerue, and what there is amis.
            
            
               Printer.
               Your meaning I perceyue, your purpoſe I allowe,
               
                  In that you are ſo diligent to proſecute your vowe.
               And as in ages all, thoſe haue their prayſes due,
               Which painfully do runne their race, and idleneſſe eſchue:
               So can I not miſlyke your noble enterpriſe:
               Which ſeeke to helpe your countreymen, with this your fyne deuiſe.
               But ſhall I tell you playne, herein what is my mynde?
               Me thinke this worke was done before, and it in print I fynde:
               For Eſope (as you knowe,) already engliſht is:
               And what doth yours, but taſte of him? naught do I ſée but his.
            
            
               Author.
               This briefly vnderſtande, that Eſope is not laſt
               In this my booke, nor only he alone doth ſtande agaſt:
               But ſundry writers elſe aboute him here do ſtande,
               Both wittie, learned, eloquent.

as hath ben tane in hande.
               Beſides, if well you marke, comparyng that with myne,
               It is as neare as Eaſt to Weaſt, and droſſe to Syluer fine.
               Vncomely tales in that are founde, and moſt abſurde to reade,
               Of reaſon voyde, of mirth bereft, to no good ende they leade,
               No head nor foote in them is had, but ſet confuſedly,
               On Eſope falſly forged tales, what man can it denye?
               As in the lyfe of Xanthus wyfe, and others he doth write
               So rudely, falſly, fooliſhly, how then ſhould this delite?
               Of Eſope that which I do write, the Greeke text doth allowe,
               Diſſenting cleane from that you thinke, let this content you nowe.
               In common place it is reduced, applying as I might,
               So truely, vnto euery thing his proper place and right.
               From nintéene authors elſe, I haue ſelected out,
               
                  Their fine deuiſe, their ſayings wiſe, their pleaſant déedes and ſtout.
               The truth hereof you heare, firſt trie, then iudgement geue:
               If contrary you finde to this then do not me beleue.
            
            
               Printer.
               I haue compared ſince your doings vnto his,
               And contrarie to that I thought, I finde that now it is:
               Beſides vncomely tales, and falſly forged fables,
               Wherewith his booke repleniſht is, perceyue I many bables.
               For yours and his do farre in euery caſe diſſent,
               I ſée from whome you do deriue, your doings and intents.
               To aunſwere your demaund full readie am I preſt,
               And will hereafter when you liſt, accompliſh your requeſt.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE TABLE.
            
               THe firſt Fable of the penance of the Wolfe, the Foxe, and the Aſse. Fol. 1.
               The Spyder & the Gout. Fol. 3.
               The Aſse, the Trumpetter, & a Hare, the meſsanger. Fol. 6
               Of an olde man eodem.
               An Heremite & a Soldier Fol. 7
               The Foxe and Bramble. eod.
               The Myſe & the Frogs Fol. 8
               The Beaſts & the Birds Fol. 9
               Pecock & Nightingale. eod.
               A yong mā that ſong at the buriall of his mother Fol. 10
               A Lion in loue with a countreymans daughter. eodē.
               The Gourde & Pine tree Fol. 11
               Of the Spyder and the Swalow Fol. 12
               Of a Dog and a Wolfe eod.
               Of an Aſse and a Foxe Fol. 13
               Of the Egle and a Pye. eod.
               A Countreyman that would paſse ouer a Riuer. Fol. 14
               Of a Hart and a Vine. eod.
               Of an Aſse that ſerued an vnkynde maiſter. Fol. 15
               Of a Husbandeman pricked by a Bee eodem.
               Of the tree Abrotanum, and and the Hare Fol. 16
               The Crow and the Dog. eo.
               Of a Hunter and Partrich. Fol. 17
               The Dolphin & the Eele. eo.
               The Lyoneſse & the Fox. Fol. 18
               Of an Aſtronomer & a Trauayler eodem.
               Of Scholers. eodem
               A boaſter Fol. 19
               Of a Boaſter. Fol. 20
               Of the Mole eodem
               The birth of Hilles. Fol. 21
               The Frog and the Foxe. eod.
               A Pecocke ſpoyled of his fethers by a Souldier eod.
               The Kid and the Wolfe. Fol. 22.
               The Sunne and the Northeaſt wynde eodem
               Of a Foxe and Women eating of a Henne Fol. 23
               A Dog and Wolues eodem
               Pecock and the Crane. Fol. 24
               A knight which had a brauling wyfe. eodem
               Arion and the Dolphin. Fol. 25
               A Kid and a wolfe Fol. 27
               The Crab and the Foxe Fol. 28
               The Apple tree, and the Pomegranate tree. eod.
               A Dog and his maiſter. eod.
               Of the Turtle Fol. 22
               A ſcolding woman. eodem.
               The wolf and the Crane. Fol. 30
               A Fiſher and a little Fiſh. Fol. 31
               Of a Foxe that would kyll a Henne ſitting. eodem.
               
                  The Frogs and their king. Fol. 32
               The Colyer & the Fuller. Fol. 33
               Of the Rauen & Wolues. eo.
               A Father and his Sonnes. Fol. 34
               Of Bulles and a Lyon. eodem
               The Lyon that begged of the wolfe part of his pray. Fol. 35
               Of a Snayle Fol. 36
               The Hart and the Foxe. eod.
               Of the Elme & the Oſiar. Fol. 37
               Hart and the Wolfe. eodem
               Of a Feller of woodde Fol. 38
               The Cock and the Foxe Fol. 39
               Of a deceyuer. Fol. 40
               Fox caught by a Dog whiles ſhe fained hir ſelf dead Fol. 41
               Of a Boy and a theefe eod
               Of a Thruſhe. Fol. 42
               Of the aire and the Wind. eo.
               Of a Trauayler. Fol. 43
               Of a Woman & a Hen. eod.
               Of a couetous man eodem
               The Dog & the ſhadow. Fol. 44
               A couetous Embaſſador Fol. 45
               The couetous mā dying eo.
               Of a couetous man that eate withered apples. Fol. 46
               A leſter and a Biſhop Fol. 47
               Of a prieſt which buryed his Dogge eodem.
               Of the Owle. Fol. 48
               Of a Foxe Fol. 49
               Of the Lion and the Goat. Fol. 50
               Of a Foxe taken by a Countreyman eodem
               Of a woman that would dye for hir husband Fol. 51
               The Lyon being old. eodem
               Of the Hares & the Frogs. Fol. 52
               The Bee and Iupiter. Fol. 53
               Of a Hart and a Lyon. Fol. 54
               Of the Towne dogs. eod.
               Of two Pottes eod.
               Of the Swanne ſinging at the poynt of death. Fol. 55
               An old man that ſet trees. eo.
               The Dog and the Cock Fol. 56
               Of a Frier, Laymā, & wolf. eo.
               Of a Parat Fol. 57
               Of an Aſſe. Fol. 58
               Pacient and Phyſition. eod.
               An Aſſe caryed an image. Fol. 59
               Frogs and the Crabbe. eod.
               Leopard and Vnicorne fyghting with a Dragon. Fol. 60
               Enuious dog & the Oxe Fol. 61
               Of a yong man. eodem
               Countryman and Peares. eo.
               Of a man that refuſed Clyſters. Fol. 62
               Of a Deceyuer eodem
               Of the Cat and the Myſe. Fol. 63
               The Wolf and the Shepe. Fol. 64
               Of the ſicke Aſse. eod.
               Of a Foxe. eodem.
               A mā that wold kil a hog Fol. 65
               
                  Of the Egle that cited al maner of birdes Fol. 66
               Satyre and wayfaringmā. eo.
               The Pye and Cuckow Fol. 67
               Of a Serpent eod.
               The rule of womē ouer their husbandes. Fol. 68
               Of a Woman eodem
               The Bore & countrymā Fol. 69
               Of a Gnatte Fol. 70
               Of a nouriſher of Bees. eod.
               Creping worms & beaſts. Fol. 71
               A bird called Kings fiſher. eo.
               The Hen and the Foxe Fol. 72
               Two enimies eodem
               The Crowe & the Rauen Fol. 73
               The Wolfe and the Fox. eod.
               The Couetous man, and the enuious. Fol. 74
               Wolfe and the Aſse Fol. 74.75
               The Lyon and the Wolfe. Fol. 75
               The Cocke and the Cat. Fol. 76
               Countryman & Serpent Fol. 77
               A Seruant which caſt his maſters Aſse from a rock. eod.
               The Bat, the Bramble, and the Cormorant Fol. 78
               Of a Worme. Fol. 79
               Of Cockles eodem.
               The Aſse and the Foxe eod.
               Dogge and the Aſse Fol. 80
               Wicked man & the diuel. eo.
               Of a Camel. Fol. 81
               The Foxe and Lyon. eod.
               Of the Eagle. Fol. 82
               A Dog fearing the rayne. eo.
               Of a Cocke eodem.
               A ſicke mā and a phyſitiā. Fol. 83.
               A mā and his two wiues. eo.
               Of a Souldier. Fol. 84
               Of Trauailers. eodem.
               A Lion and a Beare. Fol. 85.
               Rich man and his Seruāt. Fol. 86
               Of a Woman that bet hir Husband. Fol. 87.
               Of Fiſhers Fol. 88
               A riche man & a poore. eod.
               Of a Phyſition Fol. 89
               Countrymā & the mouſe. eo.
               Of the Lyon and the Hog. Fol. 90
               Dog that deuoured ſhepe. eo.
               Of the Larke. Fol. 91
               Of the wylde Aſse eodem
               Of the Countreyman and a counſeller eodem
               Of Iupiter. Fol. 92
               Of Flyes Fol. 93
               The Egle and the Rauen. eo.
               Two yong men eodem
               Of Money. Fol. 94
               The Goate and the Vine Fol. 95
               Of the Ant eodem
               Of Myſe that woulde hang a bell about a Cats neck. eod.
               Of Fiſhers. Fol. 96
               The wolfe & the Sow. Fol. 97
               
                  Of a Catte eodem
               A man that woulde trye hys wyues mynde eodem.
               The Cock & the Capon. Fol. 98
               A Fouler and a Larke. eod.
               Of a Gooſe. Fol. 99
               A woman and hir Louer. eo.
               Of a Serpent and a Husbādman Fol. 100
               A man and a woman twice maryed. eodem
               Of the Countryman and the Horſe Fol. 101
               Of the Foxe that fell into a Well. Fol. 101.102.
               A Pig & his fathers wil. eod.
               Cockatrice & Seawolf. Fol. 102.
               Of a Linnet Fol. 103
               The Mule eodem.
               Of a King and Apes. eodem
               Of Oxen. Fol. 104
               Of a Hogge. Fol. 105
               A man which hid treſure. eo.
               The Pygard & the Egle Fol. 106
               A man ſtoned eod.
               A Rauen and a ſerpent. eod.
               A poore man. Fol. 107
               A lerned mā not eſtemed. eo.
               Of a Phyſition. Fol. 108
               Of Dogges Fol. 109
               A ſhepe waſting corne. Fol. 110.
               The Owle and the Lark. eo.
               Of the Reede. Fol. 111.
               Of the Eele. eodem
               The Crow & the Shepe. eod.
               The Ape & the Fox. Fol. 112.
               The Frogs & the Sun. eod.
               A Wolf fallen into a pit. eod.
               Two Hogges. Fol. 113
               Of the Wolfe that putte on a Sheepes skinne eodem
               The Elephant Fol. 114
               Of an Aſſe eodem
               A Husbandmā & a Poet. Fol. 115
               Of a riche man vnlerned, and a poore man lerned. Fol. 116.
               The Pike & the Tench. Fol. 117
               Of a iealous man. eod.
               Of a Liberall man Fol. 118
               A couetous man eod.
               The Dog and the Lyon. Fol. 119.
               Of the Shepeherde and the Husbandmen eodem.
               Of Mercurius. eod.
               An old mā and his Son. Fol. 120:
               Of the Camell. Fol. 121
               Of the Aſse, the Ape, and the Mole eodem.
               Of a ryche man. eodem
               A madde man. Fol. 122
               A Prieſt and his Boy eod.
               A yong man Fol. 123
               Of Iupiter eodem
               Of the Woolfe, and the Lambe Fol. 124
               Of a Swanne eodem
               
                  Of a Horſeman and a Husbandman Fol. 125
               A man and his Dog eodem
               A Souldier & his horſe Fol. 126
               The Kid and the Wolf. eod.
               A Philoſopher. Fol. 127
               The Mouſe and the Cat. eo.
               The Sow and the Dog. Fol. 128.
               A Lamb and a Wolfe. eod.
               Of a Flye Fol. 129.
               The Ape and his two Sonnes eod.
               An olde man that carryed an Aſse. eodem
               The Firre tree & Buſhe. Fol. 131
               The Sow and the Bitch. Fol. 132
               The Dogs and the Aſſe. eod.
               The Lyon & the Foxe. Fol. 133.
               Of the Wolfe beeing hungrye. eod.
               The Horſe & the Hart. Fol. 134.
               Of the Ape and his young ones. Fol. 135.
               Of Maryners eodem
               Of the Owle Fol. 136
               A Foxe and a Dog. eod.
               A Wolfe & Porkupine. Fol. 137.
               An old man loth to die. Fol. 138.
               The Aſse & the Lyon. eod.
               The Horſe & the Aſse. Fol. 139.
               Iupiter and the Rauen. Fol. 140.
               Of the Flea and the Lion. eo.
               Pecock & the Chough. Fol. 141.
               A man and his Dog. Fol. 142.
               Of a Heardman. eodem.
               A man created Cardinal. Fol. 143
               The Field Myſe eodem
               Of a Flea Fol. 144
               Of a Fiſher eodem
               Of the Curryer and the hunter. Fol. 145
               A Wolfe Fol. 146
               Of a Beare eodem
               Of the ſymple Countreyman. Fol. 147
               The Mule & the Horſe. eod.
               Of a Diuell Fol. 148
               The Birdes. Fol. 149
               Of the Oxe and the Bullocke eodem:
               Of a Boye that woulde not learne Fol. 150
               Of the Doue & the Crowe. folio eodem.
               The Aſse & the Calfe. Fol. 151
               Of the Marchaunte and the Iewe. eodem
               Of a Carter. Fol. 152
               An olde Woman. eodem
               The Nyghtingale and the Rauen. Fol. 153
               Of the Doue & the Pye. Fol. 154
               Of the Aſse and Frogs. eod.
               The Pellican Fol. 155
               Of the Smythe and hys Dogge eodem.
               
                  Of the Bull & the Mouſe. Fol. 156
               Of a Weaſyll. eodem
               Of Hares. Fol. 157
               Of the Nut tree, the Aſſe, and the woman eodem
               The Beare and the Bee. eodē
               
               Of a Boy & his mother Fol. 158
               Of a Grammarian teachyng an Aſſe. Fol. 159
               Of a man that woulde try his friendes eodem
               Of a yong mā & an old. Fol. 160
               Of a Lyon and a Bull Fol. 161
               Of a Larke eodem.
               Of an Aſse. Fol. 163
               Of one that played the parte of Chriſte Fol. 164
               Of the Harte eodem.
               Of the Countreyman and of Hercules Fol. 165
               Of the Byting Dog. eodem.
               Of the Hog & the Horſe. eod.
               Of the Swan & the crow. Fol. 166
               Of the Thruſhe. eodem.
               The Lyon & the Mouſe. Fol. 167
               Of a Riuer. eod.
               Of the Serpent. Fol. 168
               Of a manne that brake an Image eodem
               Of an Aſse & a Rauen. Fol. 169
               Of a Dogge eodem.
               The Nurſe & the Wolf. eod.
               Of a woman that wepte for hir husbande Fol. 170
               Of a woman beaten. eodem
               Of the Widow and the grene Aſse Fol. 171
               Of the Rauen & the Fox. Fol. 172
               The Dog and the Shepe. eo.
               Of the Dogge and the Butcher. Fol. 173
               Of the Harte and the Oxen. folio. eodem.
               The Hare and the Foxe. Fol. 176.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶
                  〈…〉
               
               nance of the VVolfe, the Foxe, and the Aſſe.
            
               Abuſe of the ſimple.
               
                  
                     THe Wolfe, the Foxe, and the Aſſe ſometime iournied togither towards Rome, to obtayne remiſſion of their ſinnes: In the way (bycauſe they thought the Pope would be otherwiſe occupied, that he might not intende them) they agréed to be ſhriuen one of an other, and to ſuffer penance at their diſcretion. The Wolfe therefore made hys confeſſion to the Foxe in this maner: That he ſaw a Sow which had .xij. Pigges, the which walked alone in the fields, walowing in fatnes, and ſuffred hir Pigges at home to ſtarue: wherfore he deuoured the ſow, bicauſe of hir heinous offence in forſaking hir yong ones: and after, being moued to pitie, he killed alſo the pigs, to rid them out of their paine, and ate them vp: This he tolde with teares, deſiring to knowe what penance he ſhould do therefore. In fayth (quod the Foxe) thy fault is not great, ſay once a Pater noſter, and then thou ſhalt be pardoned. Straight after, the Foxe began his confeſſion thus: A coū
                     tryman had a Cocke of the game, which bet and vanquiſhed al other cocks néere about, who with

his ſhrill crowing, troubled in euery quarter, not onely the hole, but alſo the ſicke perſons, eſpecially thoſe which hadde the headake, whoſe pride I could not well away with: as I founde him therefore on a time abroade with the hens, I caught him, and caried him away to my hole, where I deuoured him: for whiche déede the Hens kackled againſt me, and troubled me with their crying: I therefore to reuenge the iniurie done vnto me, tore many of them in péeces and ate them: herein I confeſſe that I offended, therfore I require pardon. Herevnto the Wolfe ſayd: Thou diddeſt wel in qualifying the noyſe and pride of the Cocke and Hens, and therefore it is but a ſmall fault, yet will I ioyne thée this penance, That the thrée frydaies following thou eate no fleſhe, if thou canſt get none: for I will ſhew thée as much fauour as thou diddeſt to me. Wel now Syr ſaid they to the Aſſe, let vs heare thy confeſſion, who beganne thus: My moyling and drudging which I endure, is not vnknowen to you my Lords, as in carying of corne ſackes, ſtone, woode and water, yet once I offended, whereof I repente me full ofte: For a ſeruaunt of my Lordes, appoynted ruler ouer me, béeing once a colde, a ſtrawe appeared oute of hys ſhoo, which I ſnatched away from hym, whereby he tooke greate harme and colde of his

féete. Therfore bée mercifull vnto me, and ioyne me ſome penance. But they ſayde, what haſte thou done thou théefe? Mary fye on thée, by thy meanes that ſeruaunt had ſuch hurt of his féete, that wée thinke he is dead thereof, whereby thy ſoule is damned, and therefore thy body oughte not to eſcape ſcotte frée: then they killed and deuoured him.
                  
                     MOR. The mightie and ryche men in lyke maner doo pardon one another, but to the poore they are harde harted and inexorable.
               
            
            
               Abundance ſomtime perillous.
               
                  4 Of the Spider, and the Goute.
                  A Spider nighe wéeried with continuall labour, ceaſſed off hys woorke and walked abroade for diſporte: whome the Goute mette, and accompanyed as faſte as he coulde, thoughe it were with muche payne: when that dayes iourney was nighe at a poynte, they approched néere to a lyttle Towne called T
                           •
                        che, where they determined to ſéeke fitte logding for their purpoſe. The Spider tooke little héede but turned into the houſe of an excéeding ryche man, where on euery ſide he ſette vp his ſtreamers. Then were ſtraight at hande, thoſe like Diuels in a play, which caſt downe his webbes, and as faſte as he ſet them vp in any part of the houſe,

they were ſwept downe: he could not worke ſo cloſely, but it was founde out: ſuche was his miſerie, that in a houſe of ſo muche wealth and abundaunce, he onely wanted and was thruſt downe. But the Goute wente lyke a begger, (which cauſed him to be the longer without lodging) at length he gotte him to the cottage of a poore man, where when he had laide him downe to reſt, it is not to be tolde what miſerie he endured: his ſupper was coorſe bread, and a Cup of colde water to drinke, when he was dry: his bed to reſt his wéerie bones vppon, was a harde boorde ſtrewed without either boughs or graſſe, but thinly with a little ſtrawe. I néed not ſhew, howe ill agréed ſo harde a bedde and ſo rude an hoſte, to ſo tender limbes, and to his ſkin as ſoft as ſilke. When the day ſtarre was ſcarſe riſen, the Goute and the Spider mette agayne. Then the Spider firſt declared his nightes ill reſt, and how oft he ſhifted his place: ſometime vpbrayding the Maiſter with too muche niceneſſe, ſometime with the double diligence of the ſwéepers. Ah (quod the Goute) the pouertie of mine hoſte is incredible: for if I had leiſure, I could ſhewe thée ſpottes blacke and blew, that my bedde as hard as the Adamant, hath imprinted in my ſoft ſkin. Then they tooke counſel thus once agayne, That the Spider ſhould goe to the poore mans

cottage, and the Goute to the riche mans houſe, where vnto they bothe agréed. When it waxed darke, they came néere to a Citie, and the Goute remembring well his appoyntment, faire and ſoftely went into an excéeding rich mans houſe, where he hid him ſelfe: whom when the Maiſter had ſcarſe ſéene, Ieſu God with what harty good wil, what kindneſſe, and with what names dyd he entertayne him: ſtrayghtway he was layde vppon beds of Doune, his bolſters ſtuffed with ſoft Partrich feathers. I wil not ſpeake of the wines, as ſwéete and darke wines, wines of Leſbus and Campania, birdes that féede on grapes, Pheſants, and party coloured birdes: to conclude, there was no kinde of pleaſure that his fantaſie lacked. The Spider wente into a poore mans cottage and began his webs on euery ſide, from wall to wall he hanged them vp, he followed his buſineſſe with hande and féete, he brake it downe and ſet it vp agayne, and that he began he ended: and to tell you at a worde, he was Lorde and King alone, crafte and pollicie he feared none, for his buylding was ſo high, that he was without the reache of a broome. Not long after the Goute ſpake with the Spider, to whom he magnified his pleſures, his happineſſe and riches: The Spider likewiſe wonderfully prayſed his kingdome and libertie in buylding:

They concluded therefore, that whyther ſo euer they iorneyed, the Goute ſhould lodge at the rich mans houſe, and the Spider at the poore mans cottage.
                  
                     MOR. Some ſorte of men ſpéede better in ſome place than others, and riche mens houſes are a manſion place for diſſeaſes: but where leaſt riches are, there is moſt libertie.
               
            
            
               Abiectes.
               
                  3 Of an Aſſe, the Trumpeter, and a Hare, the Meſſanger.
                  THe Lyon king of foure footed beaſtes, hauing war with the Foules, ſet his armie in aray, ready to ioyne battel with them: whō the Beare aſked what furderaunce the ſluggiſh Aſſe, or the fearful Hare would be, to win the field, bicauſe he ſawe them amongſt the other ſouldiours. He anſwered him: The Aſſe with the ſounde of his Trumpet, ſhall encourage the Souldiours to fight: and the Hare, bycauſe of his ſwifteneſſe, ſhall be a Meſſanger.
                  
                     MOR. None is ſo vile, but good for ſome thing.
               
            
            
               Abstinence.
               
                  4 Of an olde man.
                  A Certaine deuout man counſelled an old man to leaue off the luſtes of the fleſh, whervnto he had bene outragiouſly giuen. He aunſwered hym: Holly Father, I will obey your reuerend

and holeſome preceptes, for I perceiue that Venerie doth muche hurte me, neither am I able to follow that trade any longer.
                  
                     MOR. Many abſtayne from vyces, wherein they are nooſeled, not for the loue of God or goodneſſe, but bicauſe of infirmitie, and feare of puniſhment.
               
            
            
               Agreement perforce.
               
                  5 Of an Hermite and a Souldiour.
                  A Certayne Heremite, béeing a man of godly liuing, exhorted a Souldiour to leaue of the warfare in this worlde, which waye very few without offending God and hurte of their ſoule, doo walke in, and to giue him ſelfe to quietneſſe, and prepare for his ſoules health. I will Father (quod the Souldier) doo as ye wil me, but truthe is, that in theſe dayes Souldiours may neither demaunde their wages, though it be very ſmall, ne yet take any pray.
                  
                     MOR. Many forſake their wicked liuing, bycauſe they can vſe it no longer.
               
            
            
               Ayde.
               
                  6 Of the Foxe and the Bramble.
                  AS a Foxe clymbed a hedge, hys féete ſlipped, who (as he was fallyng) caught holde on a Bramble to ſtaye hym: wherefore when he hadde torne his féete with the prickes therof, béeing in payne, he ſayd to the Bramble:

woe is me, for I came to thée for helpe, who haſt hurt me worſe: not ſo (quod the Briar) thou waſt deceiued, for I catche euery thing, and thinkeſt thou to lay holde on me?
                  
                     MOR. Some are ſo fooliſh as to require aide of thoſe which naturally are bent to hurt.
               
            
            
               Ambition.
               
                  7 Of the Miſe and the Frogs.
                  THe Miſe on a time cōtended with the Frogs for the kingdome of the Marſhes, wherupon they proclaimed open warre. The battell being ioyned, at the firſt onſet they behaued thēſelues ſo valiantly, that the victorie was doutfull. The wily Mouſe lurking in the graſſe, priuilie as it were out of an ambuſhment, aſſauted the Frog. But the Frog being of ſtrength more puiſſant, in courage and leaping more valiant, with open warre prouoked his enimie: Their ſpeares were bulruſhes. It hapned, as they were fighting, that a kight eſpied them a farre off, who incontinently made ſpéede vnto them: but theſe noble warriours, being earneſt in fighting, and nothing regarding themſelues, were ſnatched vp, and torne in pieces by the Kight.
                  
                     MOR. The lyke happeneth to ſeditious Citizens, which being inflamed with the gréedy luſts of bearing rule, whiles they ſtriue either with other, who ſhall be head officer, do hazarde theyr goods, and commonly their liues.
               
            
            
               
               Ambodexter.
               
                  8 Of the beaſtes and the birdes.
                  THere was ſometime a battaile betwéene the beaſts and the birds, the victorie was vncertaine, for both hoped wel, yet much feare and dā
                     ger was on either partie. The Bat thinking the birds to be the weaker ſide, left their companie, & tooke part with their enimies. The birdes by the conducting and gouernment of the Egle wonne the fielde. The Batte was condemned for a runaway, and baniſhed the companie of all birdes, and that from thenceforthe he ſhould neuer flie by day light, and this was the only cauſe, that the Battes flie but by nighte.
                  
                     MOR. He that will not take part of the ſoure, ſhall not taſte of that which is ſwéete.
               
            
            
               All things as God will.
               
                  9 Of the Pecocke and the Nightingale.
                  THe Pecocke complained to Iuno, Siſter and wife to Iupiter, bicauſe the Nightingale ſong ſo ſwéete, and ſhée hirſelfe for hir horſeneſſe, was a byword to all men. To whome Iuno ſaid: Euery one hath his propre gifte of God: The Nightingal in ſinging, but thou in colours of feathers paſſeſt all other birdes, euery man muſt be content with his eſtate.
                  
                     MOR. What God ſendeth, receiue it thankefully, neither ſéeke thou further, for god doth nothing vnaduiſedly.
               
            
            
               
               All things not decent.
               
                  10 Of a yong man that ſong at the buriall of hys mother.
                  A Certayne man wepte and lamented for his wife beeing caried to burying, but his ſonne did ſing: whom his Father rebuked, as he had bene madde that he would ſing when hys mother went to buriall, wheras he ought with him to be heauy and lament. Why Father (quod he) if thou haue hyred theſe Prieſts to ſing, why arte thou angry with mée that ſing for nothing? That is no parte of thy office ſayd his Father, but belongeth to the Prieſt.
                  
                     MOR. All things are not ſéemely for all men.
               
            
            
               Armed alwayes.
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     1 Of a Lyon in loue with a Countreymans daughter.
                  A Lyon enamoured with a Countreymans daughter, deſired hir greatly, wherevppon he requeſted hir father to giue hir to him in mariage. What (quod the man) ſhould I marry my daughter to a beaſt? Then the Lyon frowned and grinded his téeth at him, wherewith the countreyman béeing afrayde, went from his former talke, and ſayde: I woulde gladly matche my daughter with thee, ſo that thy téeth were oute, and thy nayles off, bycauſe the mayde ſtandeth in doubte thereof. The Lyon béeyng inflamed with loue, did ſo, and then required the

mayde of him. The Countreyman ſéeing hym lacke his teeth and hooues, tooke vp a club wherwith he diuers times baſted him, and chaſed him from his houſe.
                  
                     MOR He that yéeldeth him ſelfe to his enimies, is ſoone diſpatched.
               
            
            
               Arrogancie.
               
                  12 Of a Goorde and a Pinetree.
                  A Goord ſometime was ſowen néere to a Pinetrée, which for greatneſſe of body and breadth of boughes, paſſed. It happened that this Goord (by muche rayne and temperature of weather) grewe very rankely, and extended his boughes loftily: He ſprong vp aboute the Pinetree and wrapped him about his boughes and leaues, craking that he had greter leaues, hanging floures, great fruite and freſhe. At length he was ſo puft with pride, that he durſt ſpeake thus to the pinetrée: Séeſt thou not (quod hée howe farre my leaues excéede thyne, and howe in flouriſhing I paſſe thée, and am nowe, euen in thy toppe? The Pinetrée, in wyſedome and ſtrengthe excellyng, nothyng woondered at the loftyneſſe of the Goorde, but thus aunſwered and ſayde vnto hym: I haue a long tyme wyntered and ſommered héere, and haue paſſed through the pykes, and yet remayne as ſounde as a bell, but thou in thy firſte flouriſhing, what tyme thy

leaues ſhall fall, thy courage will be calmed, and all thy force in the duſt.
                  
                     MOR. In proſperitie we ought not to be lofty.
               
            
            
               Attempt not aboue thy capacitie.
               
                  13 Of the Spider and the Swallowe.
                  A Spider offended with the ſwallow, bicauſe ſhée deuoured the flies which wer his meat, hanged vp his webbes afore the hole, (from whence the Swallowe ſhould flie) to take hir. The Swallowe flew forth and caryed away the webbe with the weauer. Then the Spider hanging in the aire, and perceiuing his deathe to be at hand, ſaid: Iuſtly haue I this deſerued, which did thinke to catche great birdes, when wythout great labor I coulde ſcarſe get the ſmalleſt thing that flyeth.
                  
                     MOR. Attempt nothing aboue thy capacitie.
               
            
            
               Attendance.
               
                  14 Of a Dogge and a Wolfe.
                  AS a Dog ſlept in a court before the houſe of his Mayſter, a Wolfe came ſodainely and caught him: whome, as he would haue killed, the Dogge beſought, ſaying: Good maiſter ſpare me now bicauſe I am leane and thinne as thou ſéeſt, but if thou wilte tarrie, there ſhall be within theſe fewe dayes a great mariage kept at my Lordes, where I will ſo fill me and make me ſo fatte, that then I ſhall doe thée more good.

The Wolfe crediting his wordes, let him goe. Shortly after the wolfe came and found the dog ſléeping vpon the houſe top, to whome he called as he ſtode beneathe, willing him to perfourme his promis: Nay verily (quod the Dogge) but if from henceforth thou finde me ſléeping without doores, tary not at al, vpon hope of any Mariage.
                  
                     MOR. The burnt hand euer after feareth the fire.
               
            
            
               Bablers.
               
                  15 Of the Aſſe and the Foxe.
                  AN Aſſe put on a Lyons ſkin and walked abrode, putting all other beaſts in feare, who on a time ſéeing a Fox, endeuoured to make him alſo afraide. But hée (for by chance he heard him bray) ſaid to him: Thou knoweſt well that I would haue trembled at thée, if I had not herd thy braying.
                  
                     MOR. Some vnlearned men which outwardly beare countenance, through their babling are reproued.
               
               
                  16 Of the Egle and the Pie.
                  THe Pie ſometime deſired the Egle, to make him one of his frends of his houſhold, bicauſe the beautie of his body deſerued it, and alſo the redineſſe of his ſpeache to doe meſſages: I would ſo doe, ſaid the Egle, but I feare leaſt that which I ſpeake within doores, thou wouldeſt preache it

abroade on the houſe tops.
                  
                     MOR. Kepe no bablers nor teltales in thy houſe.
               
               
                  17 Of a Countreyman that would paſse ouer a Ryuer.
                  A Countrey man ready to paſſe a ſtreame, which by chaunce was ſodenly ryſen, wyth late rayne that fell, ſought the ſhallowe. When he had aſſayed that part of the Riuer which was calmeſt, he founde it déeper than he ſuppoſed: agayne, where it was rougheſt, there he found it ſhalloweſt: then he bethought him whyther he might commit his life to the calmeſt place of the water, or to the rougheſt.
                  
                     MOR. Dreade thoſe leſſe whiche are full of woordes and threatnings, than thoſe that ſay nothing.
               
            
            
               Benefactors.
               
                  18 Of a Hart and a Vine.
                  A Harte eſcaping the Hunters, lay hid vnder a Vyne. When they were a little paſt hir, ſhe ſuppoſing ſhe lay ſafe, began to féede on ſhe vine leaues, which béeing ſtirred, the Hunters returned: and iudging (as it was in déede) ſome beaſt to lurke vnder the leaues, they wyth their arrowes ſlew the harte: who as ſhe lay a dying, ſayde thus: Rightly am I ſerued, for I ought not to haue hurt that which ſaued me.
                  
                     MOR. They which doo any wrong to their benefactors, are puniſhed of God.
               
            
            
               
               Benefites ill rewarded.
               
                  19 Of an Aſse that ſerued an vnkind Maſter.
                  AN Aſſe ſerued a certayne man many yeres, in whiche tyme he neuer offended hym. It happened afterwarde, béeing heauy laden, that he ſtumbled in a rough way, and fell vnder his burthen. Then his cruell maiſter bet hym ſore, and in ſpite of his harte forced hym to riſe, calling him a ſlouthful & ſluggiſh beaſt: but this poore wretch thought thus with him ſelfe: Miſerable is my eſtate, which haue hapned to ſo vnkind a maiſter, for though I haue ſerued him a long time without diſpleaſing him, yet dothe he not forgiue me this one fault, in recompence of the good ſeruice I haue done him.
                  
                     MOR. This Fable is agaynſt thoſe, whiche forget the benefites that they haue receiued, and gréeuouſly puniſh the leaſt offence of their benefactors toward them done.
               
            
            
               Benefites.
               
                  20 Of a Husbandman pricked by a Bee.
                  A Huſbandman being ſtong by a Bée, maruelled that out of the ſelfe ſame mouth ſo ſwéete iuyce proceded, and ſo gréeuous a ſting. The Bee aunſwered, the more beneficiall I am, the more I hate them that doo me wrong.
                  
                     MOR. The more good men doo, the leſſe iniurie they endure.
               
               
                  
                  21 Of the tree Abrotanum, and the Hare.
                  THe propertie of Abrotanum, is to drawe out any thing that ſticketh faſt, with the helpe of Auxangia. Wherefore on a time came a Hare halting to him, for a thorne which ſtucke in his foote, and ſayde: O Phyſitian both of body and ſoule, take pitie on me and helpe me, and forthwith ſhewed his right foote. This trée being moued with compaſſion, putte himſelfe vppon the wounde, brought out the thorne, and healed it. Wherfore the Hare remembring this benefite, caried daily a flaggon of water on his ſhoulders, and watered the roote of the trée, wherby he cauſed it to continue freſh and gréene.
                  
                     MOR. Let vs alwayes gladly ſerue our benefactors.
               
            
            
               Benefites for aduauntage.
               
                  22 Of the Crow and the Dogge.
                  AS the Crow was offering ſacrifice to M
                           •
                        
                        nerua, ſhe bad the Dog to hir▪ good cheare, but he aunſwered hir: Why doeſt thou beſtowe ſacrifice to no purpoſe? For the Goddeſſe ſo hateth thée, that ſhe ſuffereth thée to haue no credite in any diuination. To whom the Crowe ſayd, for that cauſe the more doo I ſacrifice vnto hir, that I might get hir fauour agayne.
                  
                     MOR. Many for aduauntage, feare not to be
                     
                        •
                     efite their enimies.
               
            
            
               
               Betraying.
               
                  23 Of a Hunter, and a Partriche,
                  A Hunter had caught a Partriche, which as he would haue killed, ſhe beſought him pardon for hir life, and to ſet hir at libertie, promiſing to bring to his net many Partriches: The Fouler anſwered hir readily agayne, ſaying: I thinke that now thou art more worthy of death: bicauſe thou haſt giuen thy worde to betray thy friende.
                  
                     MOR. He which goeth about by deceite to vndoo his friend, runneth headlong into miſerie.
               
            
            
               Beware of enemies.
               
                  24 Of the Dolphin and the Eele.
                  A Certayne Dolphin finding an Eele in the ſea, purſued after hir, whome when he had often caught, but could not holde, bicauſe of hir ſlipperineſſe, he was wonderfull ſory. But the Eele béeing diſpoſed to mocke him, and thereby to eſcape, ſpake craftily to the Dolphin: I am ſorie for thée, that thou arte too muche wéeried and gréeued with ſwimming after me, but thy labour is loſte: for in the deepe waters thou ſhalt neuer take me, but goe with me into the mudde, and thou ſhalte haue me at thy pleaſure. The fooliſhe Dolphin béeing in a chafe, and alſo gréedie of hys pray, began to ſwim after hir: intending vtterly to deſtroy hir: when the Ele had

led the Dolphin into ſhallow places ſhe wound hir ſelfe into the mud, and ſayd: Come vp to me, for I ſhal be ſtaied by the rootes of herbs, & thou ſhalt haue thy deſire of me. The Dolphin gaue a ſkip to catche the Eele, but ſhée ſkipte into the mud, and ſhée ſtacke faſte on dry grounde: In the meane time came a Fiſher, and ſtrake hym through, wherof he dyed.
                  
                     MOR. He that goeth with his Foe, it is no maruell if he fall.
               
               
                  25 Of a Lyoneſſe and the Foxe.
                  THe Fox oftentimes vpbrayded the Lyoneſſe that ſhe had but one whelpe at a time, truth it is (quod ſhe) but then that is a Lyon.
                  
                     MOR. Beautie conſiſteth not in plentie, but in vertue.
               
            
            
               Boasters.
               
                  26 Of an Aſtronomer and a Traueler.
                  A Certayne Aſtronomer diligently vewing the ſtarres, vnwittingly fel into a wel, but a Trauailer by chaunce comming by, & ſéeing him ſighing, ſayde: Doeſt not thou ſée the earth, which gaueſt thy minde vpwarde?
                  
                     MOR. Many boaſt that they know of things to come, not knowing what preſently happeneth.
               
               
                  27 Of Scholers.
                  A Certayne Whéele wright had bene often deluded by Schollers, which wer vagabunds,

which came to him for almes, ſaying they had great ſkill in Magike, and that they coulde doo many things: of which number, there came one a begging to his doore, in the name of a Maiſter of the ſeuen lyberall Artes, to whom he ſayde: My friende, were not you héere the laſte yere? No (quod the Scholer:) depart therfore (quod he) and come no more héere, for I will giue thée nothing. The Scholer was offended, and aſked why he ſpake in the ſinguler number to him, béeing a Maiſter of the ſeuen liberal Artes, and a Magitian. He aunſwered: I know much more than thou doeſt: for with one handie craft labour I fynde me, my wyfe and children, but thou with thy ſeuen Artes canſt not fynde thy ſelf, but goeſt a begging. Wherfore thou oughteſt to reuerence me, and not I thée. When hée had ſo ſayde, the Scholer departed, well mocked.
                  
                     MOR. It is a folly to boaſte of any tytle, where as knowledge wanteth of that which is profeſſed.
               
               
                  28 Of a Boaſter.
                  A Certayne ragged and yl fauoured man came into a Lauerne, and bycauſe he was light
                     
                        ••
                      regarded, beganne to boaſt of his nobilitie, 
                        ••
                     at he deſcended of an auncient houſe, to whom 
                        ••
                     e aunſwered: Auaunte knaue with thy nobilitie,

our Millers Aſſe is more noble than thou, for he goeth with a man wayting on him, but thou goeſt without.
               
               
                  29 Of a Boaſter.
                  A Certayne man, who hauing traueled farre, returned into his countrey, and made great vauntes of his manly actes that he had done in many places, eſpecially yt he had daūced a daūce at Rhodes, that none of that place could: for proofe whereof, he ſayde, that he had to witneſſe them which were there preſent, to whom one of them that ſtoode by, aunſwered: Sir, if this be true, what néedeth witneſſe, there ſtands Rhod
                           ••
                        , and there is thy daunce.
                  
                     MOR. All talke is ſuperfluous, excepte we haue preſent proofe.
               
               
                  30 Of the Mole.
                  THe Mole a blinde braſt, ſayde ſometime to hir mother: I ſée a Mulbery trée, and ſtreight after, I ſmell a great ſauour of Frankinſence: but the thirde time ſhe ſayde, I heare the noyſe of the fall of an yron pellet: hir mother anſwered: As farre as I perceiue, thou lackeſt not onely thy ſighte, but alſo thy ſmelling and hearing.
                  
                     MOR. Some brag they can doo things impoſſible, and in the leaſt are reproued.
               
            
            
               
               Boasting.
               
                  31 Of the birth of Hilles.
                  THe talke was ſometime that the Hilles dyd trauell, whereof men hearing, came thither, and ſtoode gaping about, wayting for ſome monſtruous thing, not without greate feare. At length the hilles were deliuered, and broughte foorth a Mouſe: wherat there fell ſuch a laughter amongeſt them, that they were ready to ſowne.
                  
                     MOR. Crakers will promiſe greate matters, but ſcarſe perfourme the leaſt.
               
               
                  32 Of the Frog and the Foxe.
                  A Frog came foorthe of the Mariſhes into the wood amongeſt wylde beaſtes, and ſayde, ſhe was well ſeene in Phiſike, and that hir cunning was as good as Hipocrates, or Galenes: all beaſtes gaue credite, onely the Fox mocked hir, ſaying: ſhall ſhe be counted ſkilfull in Phiſike, whoſe lippes be ſo pale? Let hir firſt heale hir ſelfe. And thus the Foxe mocked hir. For the mouth of a Frog is of a ſkie colour.
                  
                     MOR. It is méere folly to profeſſe that wherof thou haſt no ſkill.
               
               
                  33 Of a Pecocke ſpoyled of his feathers by a Souldiour.
                  A Pecocke boaſted to a Souldiour that had decked his hatte with Eſtrich feathers, that

ſhe had much fayrer feathers: and to verifie hir ſaying, ſhée ſpreade abroade hir tayle: The Souldiour therewith béeing enamored, caughte and ſpoyled hir, wherwith to decke his helmet: Then the Pecocke ſayde to hir ſelfe: wo is me wretch and foole, to ſhew ſo precious a thing to a ſpoyler, which I ought to haue kept cloſe.
                  
                     MOR. By boaſting of precious things many are ſtirred to become theeues.
               
            
            
               Boldneſſe.
               
                  34 Of the Kidde and the Wolfe.
                  AS a Kid looked out of a window, he eſpied a wolfe paſſing by, vpon whom he railed: Ah vngracious perſon ſayde the wolfe, it is not thou that taunteſt me, but thy ſafe holde.
               
               
                  35 Of the Sunne and the Northeaſt winde.
                  SOmetyme the Sunne and the Northeaſte wynde contended, who was the ſtronger, wherevpon they agréed to proue their ſtrength on a wayfaring man, that he mighte haue the victorie which cauſed him to caſt away his wallet. Firſte the Northeaſt wynde with ſharpe ſtormes & bitter blaſtes aſſayed him: He ſtayed not a whit therefore, but as he wente he wrapped his clothes double about hym: When the Sunne was come to his courſe, by litle and litle in ſpreading his beames, he calmed the wynde, then was this man in ſuche a heate & ſwet, that

he puffed and blowed excéedingly, and at length by the outragiouſneſſe thereof, béeing faynt, he coulde go no further, but got him into the coole ſhadow, caſting away his wallet, and ſate hym downe vnder a thicke woode: by which euident token the Sunne was conqueror.
                  
                     MOR. Looke afore thou leape, for thoughe thou be ſtrong, yet perhaps another is ſtronger than thou, if not ſtronger, yet craftier, with hys pollicie to giue thée the foyle.
               
               
                  36 Of a Foxe, and women eating of a Henne.
                  THe Foxe paſſing by a farme houſe, eſpied a great route of women eating Hens ſumptuouſly prepared, but (God wot) there was no talke amongſt them, to whom ſhe ſayde: what crying and barking of Dogges woulde be after me, if I ſhould doo as ye doo? Thou wicked beaſt (quod an old woman) we eate that is our own, but thou ſtealeſt from others.
                  
                     MOR. We may not be ſo bolde with other mens goods, as the right owners.
               
               
                  37 Of a Dog and Wolues.
                  A Great barking Dogge was a ſore enimie to the Wolues, for when they woulde haue entred the Citie, he kepte them out: wherefore they alſo hated the Dog, whō they would fayne haue killed. At length they ſent two Ambaſſadours to the Dog, deſiring him to come abroade

into the fields, and they would make him their king, bicauſe he was mightie and valiaunt. The fooliſh Curre conſented, and wente with them, whom they brought ſafely to the other wolues that tare him in péeces.
                  
                     MOR. Hée that will be hardy, let him kéepe him ſelfe in a ſure defence.
               
            
            
               Bragging.
               
                  38 Of the Pecocke and the Crane.
                  THe Pecocke and the Crane ſometime ſupped togither, and amongſt other talke, the Pecocke bragged much of his fayre tayle, deſpiſing the Crane: he graunted that ſhe was a fayre birde in that poynt, yet was he able with his ſtoute flying, to enter amongſt the cloudes, when ſhe could ſcarſe flye to the houſe toppe.
                  
                     MOR. Let not one thinke ſcorne of another, euery one hath his proper gifte and vertue: for he that wanteth thy qualitie, perhaps hath that which thou lackeſt.
               
            
            
               Brawling women.
               
                  39 Of a Knight that had a brawling wyfe.
                  THere dwelt a Knight at Florence, deſcended of a noble bloud, which had a waywarde and brauling wife, that dayly wente to hir ghoſtly Father, to whome ſhe complayned of hir huſbandes demeanure: for which he much blamed the knight. It happened not long after, that ſhe

deſired hir ghoſtly father to ſet hir and hir huſband at quiet, whervpon he called him to ſhrift, ſaying, that if he came, he doubted not but to make them Prendes agayne. The Knight agréeing, the other required him to make declaration of his faults. In fayth (quod the Knight) it ſhall not néede, for I know that my wyfe hath often tolde thée al that euer I did, yea and more too.
               
            
            
               Brute beastes kinder than men.
               
                  40 Of Arion and the Dolphin.
                  
                     ARion was an auncient man, and came of a noble linage: he could ſing to the harpe: he was borne in the Citie of Methimne, in the Iſle of Leſhos, whom Periander king of Corinthe loued for his cunnings ſake, from whom he departed to ſee the famous countrey of Sicilie and Italie When he was come thither, and had wel delighted the eares, and contented the mynds of moſte men in thoſe partes, he gayned greatly, and liued in pleaſure and loue of all men. Afterwarde hauing gathered much ſubſtance, he minded to returne to Corinth, whervpon he hyred a Corinthian ſhip and mariners of that coaſt, bycauſe he hoped to finde frendſhip at their hands. The Corinthians receyued him, and launched into the déepe, who béeing gréedy of thys great pray of money, tooke counſell to kill Arion. He vnderſtanding of his deſtruction, gaue them all

the money that he had, praying them only to ſaue his life. But being paſt hope and ſore afrayde, he requeſted that before his deathe, he might put on his apparel and take his Harpe and ſing a mourning ſong to comfort his hart withall: The Mariners (though they were hard harted and cruel) deſiring to heare him, graunted his petition. He being clad as he was accuſtomed, ſtanding in the hinder part of the ſhippe, ſong with a loud voyce, the ſong called Orithium. In the end of his ſong, as he ſtoode with his Harpe and in his clothes, he caſt himſelfe into the Sea. The ſhipmen nothing douting but yt he was drouned, kept on their voiage. But a ſtraunge and wonderful thing happened, for a Dolphin ſodainly ſwam by and receyued him, caryed him on his backe aboue the water, and brought him ſafe and ſound to Tenarus, in the lande of Laconia: from whence Arion went ſtraight to Corinthe, and ſhewed him ſelfe to King Periander, and how he was caryed of the Dolphin, declaring all that happened. The King little beléeued this, but commaunded him ſafely to be kept, till the truthe were tried. The Mariners were ſought for, (and Arion ſent out of the way) who being brought before the King, he demaunded of them (making no ſemblante that he hadde knowledge of Arion) whither they hearde any thing of hym in the parties whence they

came: They aunſwered, that when they ſet foorth he was in Italie, and liued well there, and was highly eſtéemed in the Cities: and alſo was excéeding riche. Whiles they thus ſpake, in came Arion with his Harpe, hauing on the ſame apparel wherewith he lept into the Sea, whereby the ſhipmen being amazed, and pricked in conſcience could not denie it.
                  
                     MOR. In brute beaſts we ſhall ſomtime finde more friendſhip, than in couetous menne, which care for nothing but riches, neither haue any ſparke of humanitie, but the only Phiſnomie.
               
            
            
               Buſie bodies.
               
                  41 Of a Kid and a Wolfe.
                  A Kidde ſtraying from the flocke, and béeing purſued by a Wolfe, turned backe to hym and ſayde: O Wolfe, bicauſe I am perſuaded that thou ſhalt eate me, play firſt on thy pipe that I may daunce, leaſt I die in ſorowe: As the Wolfe was playing and the Kid dauncing, the dogges heard it and chaſed the Wolfe: who ſayd to the Kid: I haue well deſerued this, for I ought not being a Cooke, to counterfet a Minſtrel.
                  
                     MOR. They which regard not that wherunto they are naturally inclined, but aſſay that which to others belongeth, fall into aduerſitie.
               
               
                  
                  42 Of the Crab and the Foxe.
                  A Crab fiſhe came foorth of the ſea and fed, the Foxe béeing hungry and ſéeing him, caught him: who béeing ready to be deuoured, ſayde: I am well ſerued, which béeing a fiſhe of the ſea, would liue on lande.
                  
                     MOR. Thoſe men are iuſtly miſerable, that forſaking their proper ſcience, doo meddle with that, which becommeth them not.
               
               
                  43 Of the Apple tree, and the pomgranate tree.
                  THe Pomgranate and the Apple trée contended aboute their beautie: When they had continued long in ſtrife togither, a buſh, which was their neighbour, often hearing them, at length ſayd: It is time frends to be at one.
                  
                     MOR. The vyleſt perſons ſometyme wyll meddle in their betters matters.
               
            
            
               Cauſers of euill.
               
                  44 Of a Dog and his Maiſter.
                  A Certayne man had a Dog whom he always fed with his owne handes, bicauſe he ſhould loue him the more, and when he was bound he looſed him: But yet he cōmanded his ſeruant to tye him vp, & beat him, to the end the dog might perceiue he loued him, & that his ſeruant did not. The dogge taking it gréeuouſly to be dayly tyed and beaten, ranne away Whom when his maiſter rebuked as a churle, and forgetfull of al his

benefites, that he would runne away from hym which loued him ſo, and fed him, whom he neuer bound nor 
                        •
                     ette. Ah ſir (ſayde the Dogge) that your ſeruant dothe at your commaundement, I count it done by you.
                  
                     MOR. Thoſe are euill doers, which are cauſers of euill.
               
            
            
               Chastitie.
               
                  45 Of the Turtle.
                  A Certayne Turtle béeing a widdow, liued in great heauyneſſe for the death of hir mate, but ſhe remayned chaſte: whom other birds pitying deſired hir to abide with them, whervnto at length ſhe conſented: They made hir the beſt chéere they coulde, but ſhe ſéeing their abhomination and whordome, forſooke them, and led the reſt of hir life in chaſt widowhed.
                  
                     MOR. Who proteſteth chaſtitie, muſt ſet his minde on no worldly affayres.
               
            
            
               A charme for Scoldes.
               
                  46 Of a ſcolding Woman.
                  A Certayne man had a ſcold to his wife, which alwayes brauled with him, what ſoeuer he dyd, which the more he bette hir, the more fierce ſhe was When he ſaw that ſtripes would not preuayle, he attempted an other way, for as often as ſhe chidde, he played on a payre of Bag
                        •
                      pypes, whereof he had no ſkill. When he had ſ
                        •
                     
                     
done, ſhe was more fierce: but at length he continuing his playing, ſhee daunced for anger, and in the ende ſhée ſtroke the Bagpipe out of his hand. But he toke it againe, and played, wherwith ſhee being chafed, ranne out of the doores, ſaying, that ſhée would not endure his wickedneſſe and dronkenneſſe. The next day ſhée began hir ſcolding a freſhe, but hir huſband played as he was wonte. Then the woman declared that ſhée was ouercome, and lefte of hir curſſing, promiſing hir huſband to become moſt gentle vnto him, ſo that he would lay away his Bagpipe.
                  
                     MOR. Malaperte women by diuers wayes muſt be charmed.
               
            
            
               Churle.
               
                  47 Of the Wolfe and the Crane.
                  THe Wolfe ſometime had killed a Shéepe, which as he greedely deuoured, by chaunce the bones ſtuck faſt in his throte: he trauai
                     
                        •
                     ed farre and neare, ſéeking for helpe but founde 
                        •
                     one, for all men iudged him well ſerued for his 
                        •
                     réedineſſe. At length by faire flattering wordes, 
                        •
                     nd greater promiſſes, he allured the Crane to 
                        •
                     hruſte his long necke into his throate, and to 
                        •
                     lucke out the bone that ſtucke faſte. When the 
                        •
                     rane had ſo done, he required a rewarde: But 
                        •
                     he wolfe laughed him to ſcorne, ſaying: Be pac
                     
                        •
                     ing thou patche, canſt thou not be contente with

thy life, thou art bound to thanke me therfore: for had I liſt, I might haue bitten off thy necke.
                  
                     MOR. All is loſt that is put in a riuen diſhe.
               
            
            
               Certentie.
               
                  48 Of the Fiſher and the litle Fiſhe.
                  A Fiſher caſt his hookes into the water baited with fleſhe, wherwith he caught a litle fiſh, the priſoner beſought him to releaſe him, now being ſo little, and to let him growe bigger, that héereafter hée might haue the more commoditie of him: Nay ſayde the Fiſher, I wil not bie the pigge in the poke, for I vſe to take what preſently I can get.
                  
                     MOR. Leaue not the bird in the hande, for that in the buſhe.
               
               
                  49 Of a Foxe that would kill a Henne ſitting.
                  THe Fox being entred a countreymans houſe, founde a Henne ſitting on Egges in the neſt, which beſoughte him, ſaying: I pray thée kill me not nowe being leane, tary a while till my chickens be hatched, which thou maiſte eate withoute any tootheake being yong: Ah (quod he) I were not woorthy to be called a Foxe, if nowe being hungrie, I would forſake my praie that is ready, vppon hope of Chickens which are not yet oute of the ſhell: I haue ſtrong téethe, which are

able to grind the hardeſt fleſh that is. And when he had ſo ſayde, he deuoured the Henne.
                  
                     MOR He is not wiſe, which vpon vncertayne hope of greater things, will let go that which he hath preſently.
               
            
            
               Common people.
               
                  50 Of the Frogs and their King.
                  THe Frogs beeing frée, beſought Iupiter to giue them a kyng, he laughed at their fooliſh petition, neuertheleſſe they continued their inſtant ſute ſo long, that at the length they forced him therevnto. He caſte them downe a beame, which with the fall thereof made a great noyſe in the water. The Frogs béeing afrayde helde their peace, and did homage to their king, and approched by little & little néerer vnto him. At length they boldly hopped vp and downe on him: and thus their fooliſh king became a laughing ſtocke vnto thē. Then called they on Iupiter agayne, deſiring of him a valiaunt king. He ſent thē the Storke, who walked like a ſtoute champion through the Marſhes, killing & deuouring as many Frogs as he met. At euen when the Storke was gone to reſte, they came foorthe of their holes, hoarſly crying, but to a dead man, for Iupiter his will was, ſéeing they were not content with a mercyfull kyng, that they ſhould be oppreſſed with a tyrant.
                  
                     
                     MOR. The like happeneth to the common people, which hauing a merciful & gentle prince, iudge him a daſtard and ſlouthful, and pray that they may haue a ſtoute prince. Agayne hauing a valiaunt prince, they diſprayſe hys crueltie, prayſing the others clemencie. Either it is, that we are not contented with things preſent, or that is true, ſeldome commeth the better.
               
            
            
               Company.
               
                  51 Of the Collier and the Fuller.
                  A Colyer ſometime deſired a Fuller to dwell with hym in houſe togither: Nay (ſayd the Fuller) this neither pleaſeth me, nor yet is for my profite. For I feare greatly leaſt that which I make cleane, thou ſhouldeſt ray as blacke as a coale.
                  
                     MOR. Wée are hereby warned to kéepe company with thoſe that be of a perfecte honeſt lyfe, and to ſhunne the felowſhip of leude men, as a noyſome plague.
               
               
                  52 Of the Rauen and Wolues.
                  A Rauen ſometyme followed Wolues ouer many highe hilles, wherfore he required to be partaker of their pray, bicauſe he had ſo far followed them, neither had left their companie. The Wolues made light of him, bicauſe he followed not thē, but their pray, & in that he would as ſoone deuoure the hearts of Wolues, if they

                     
                        •
                     hould be ſlayne, as of any other beaſt.
                  
                     MOR. We muſt always marke not that we 
                        •
                     oo, but of what mynd we are in dooing.
               
            
            
               Concorde.
               
                  53 Of the father and his ſonnes.
                  A Huſbandeman had many yong men to hys ſonnes, which were alwayes at variaunce, whom he diligently endeuored to vnite in loue togither, and bycauſe he would playnly open to them the inconueniences of their diſcorde, hee brought a bundle of ſmal ſtickes, which he commaunded them to bynde with a little corde, and then to breake it in péeces: they béeing but yong and weake, dyd their good will to breake it, but coulde not preuayle: Then their father looſed it, and gaue euery of them a little rodde therof, which euery one according to his ſtrength dyd eaſily breake: and foorthwith he ſayde to them: Sonnes, if yée would agree, and ſticke thus one to an other, no man were able to vanquiſh you: but if yée be eyger to hurte and purſue one an other with mortall hatred, yée ſhall ſoone bée a pray for your enimie.
                  
                     MOR. By concorde ſmal things encreaſe. By diſcorde great things waſte and conſume.
               
               
                  54 Of Bulles and a Lyon.
                  THere were foure Bulles whiche agréed to ſticke one to another aſwell in wealth as in

woe, whome the Lyon perceiued ſéeding togither, and therefore was afrayde to aſſayle them thoughe he were very hungrie: but in the ende he deuyſed by ſome craftie way to ſeuer them: whom after they wer parted, he ſoone tore them in péeces.
                  
                     MOR. Nothing is ſurer than concord, and diſcorde maketh the mightie weake.
               
            
            
               Conſenting perforce.
               
                  55 Of a Lyon which begged of the Wolfe parte of hys pray.
                  THe Wolfe and the Foxe entered felowſhip, and went a hunting, to whom, as they were deuiding the Hart which they had taken, the Lion came by chaunce, & chalenged the third parte of the pray, bycauſe he was king of foure footed beaſtes: but the Wolfe denied it: then the Lyon béeing angry, layde holde on the wolfe with his clawes, and plucked the ſkin cleane from his head, and made it redde, wherby the wolfe eſcaped ſcarſe with his life. After the Lion turned to the Foxe, and ſayde: What ſayeſt thou? Forſooth my lorde the king (quod he) I graunt not only the third part, but alſo the whole Hart vnto you: What (quod the Lion) hathe any body taught thee to anſwere ſo wiſely: Yea ſir (ſayd the Foxe) the redde hatte which you put on my fellow the Wolfe hath taught me.
                  
                     
                     MOR. Better it is ſometime to graunt a part than to léeſe the whole.
               
            
            
               Content in thy ſtate.
               
                  56 Of a Snayle and the Eagle.
                  THe Snayle béeing offended that he continually abode in moyſt and low places, deſired the Egle, (of whom he had heard, that ſhe flew ſo highe, that ſhe mighte beholde the greateſt parte of the Earth on euery ſide) to cary him vp on highe, wherby he might at once beholde both Hilles and Valleys, the Fieldes and the Sea. Which thing when the Egle had quickly done, ſhe caſt him downe, wherby he fell on ye ground, and was daſhed in péeces.
                  
                     MOR. Let no man exalt himſelfe higher than his ſtate and nature doth require.
               
               
                  57 Of the Hare and the Foxe.
                  THe Hare and the Foxe made their petitions to Iupiter, the one deſired ſwiftneſſe to hys ſubtilitie, the other ſubtilitie to his ſwiftneſſe: Iupiter aunſwered them: In the beginning of the world wée gaue euery beaſt his proper gift bountifully: now if one ſhoulde haue had all, other had ben wronged.
                  
                     MOR. God hath beſtowed his giftes ſo indifferently vpon euery man, that we oughte with our ſtate to be ſatiſfied.
               
            
            
               
               Contention with ſuperiours.
               
                  58 Of the Elme and the Oſier.
                  THere ſprong vp an Elme in the banke of a Riuer, which mocked an Oſier that grew nexte him, for his weakeneſſe, bycauſe that with the leaſt beating of the water he moued, but of his owne ſtrength and ſtoutneſſe he boaſted excéedingly, and how that he had continued there many yeres, not able to be ſhaken by the violence of the water. It hapned on a tyme, that by force of the waues he was broken downe, and caryed away by the ſtreame: Then the Oſier mocked him, ſaying: Whither away neighbour, wilte thou nowe forſake me? Where is nowe thy ſtrength become?
                  
                     MOR. Thoſe men are wyſer that giue place to their betters, than they that doo contende and haue a foule ouerthrowe.
               
               
                  59 Of the Harte and the Wolfe.
                  A Hart ſometime accuſed a Shéepe before the Wolfe, that he ought him a buſhel of wheat: The ſhéepe in very déede knew nothing of this, yet for feare of the Wolfe, promiſed payment. A day was ſet, which béeing come, the Hart put the Shéepe in remembraunce thereof, ſhe denyed it, excuſing that promiſe to be made for feare of the Wolues preſence. Forced promiſes are not to be kept.
                  
                     
                     MOR. It is a clauſe of the lawe, force muſte haue the repulſe by force. But thereof commeth a new ſentence: It is lawfull to pay craft with the lyke.
               
               
                  60 Of a Feller of Woode.
                  AS a Woodſeller was cutting woode néere a ryuer ſide, he loſt his axe, who béeing vncertayne what to doe, ſate hym downe on the ryuers banke and wepte. But Mercurius vnderſtanding the cauſe, and moued with pitie, dyued vnder the water, broughte vp a golden Axe, and aſked him, if that were it which he loſt: He denyed it to bée his: then he dyued agayne, and brought vp one of Siluer, the which he refuſed to bée hys: then he dyued the thirde tyme, and tooke vp his Axe, whiche he acknowledged to be hys which he loſt. Mercurius perceiuing him to bée a iuſte man and a true, gaue them all vnto hym, who foorthwith came to hys fellowes, and ſhewed them what hadde happened vnto hym. One of them bycauſe hée woulde alſo trys it, came to the Ryuer, and caſte in hys Axe willingly: then ſatte hym downe and wepte. Vnto whome when Mercurius had appeared, and vnderſtoode the cauſe, he lykewyſe dyued, and brought vp a golden Axe, which he aſked, if he had loſte: He reioycing, did affirme it to be his. Whoſe impudent & manifeſt falſhoode Mercurie
                     
perceiuing, neither gaue him the golden Axe, nor his owne.
                  
                     MOR. How much God loueth the righteous, ſo muche he hateth the vnrighteous.
               
               
                  61 Of the Cocke and the Foxe.
                  THE Foxe béeing ſometyme very hungry, thought by ſuttletie to gette his pray amongeſt the Hennes, which by the conduction of the Cocke were flowne into a hygher trée than he coulde clymbe: wherevppon he came to the Cocke, whome he gently ſaluted, and ſayde: What makeſt thou ſo high? Haſt thou not heard the newes of late, whiche are ſo good for vs? Verily (quod the Cocke) I heard nothing: but I pray thée what are they? The Foxe ſayde: I am come hyther to make thée priuie of oure ioye: For there was lately a generall Counſell helde of all Beaſtes, wherein was concluded a continuall peace betwéene all Beaſtes: ſo that nowe wythoute any manner of feare, moleſtation, or laying awayte of any, euery one may walke where as hée lyſte in ſafetie and quietneſſe, therefore come downe and lette vs kéepe holy thys day. The Cocke perceyuing the ſubtiltie and craft of the Foxe, ſayd to him: Thy tydings are very good, which alſo I do lyke well: and foorthwith he ſtretched out hys necke, and looked a farre off, as thoughe he

ſawe ſome ſtraunge thing, whom the Foxe aſked, what he eſpied? The Cocke aunſwered, I ſée two Dogges comming amayne with open mouth: the Foxe therewith quaking for feare, bad them Adieu, for time it is for me to be gone, and foorthwith tooke him to his féete: What ſir (quod the Cocke) whither runneſt thou? what feareſt thou? thou néedeſt doubt nothing, if this peace be concluded: verily (quod the Foxe) I can not tell whether theſe Dogges haue heard of this decrée or not. Whereby one crafte was payde with the like.
               
               
                  62 Of a deceiuer.
                  THere was a certayne man who ſowed leade and other trifles in a peece of lether, as thoughe it had bene ſome Iewell, and in the ſighte of a riche marchaunt and other men, he priuily threw it to the ground, & after tooke it vp agayn, inquiring if any had loſt it: This rich mā béeing couetous, came & affirmed it to be his: to whom the Deceiuer ſayde: Is it a precious thing as it ſéemeth? The Marchaunte auouched it to bée. Mary (quod the other) thou ſhalte not haue it it againe except thou giue me ten crownes for a rewarde, which he willingly gaue, & foorthwith departed and opened the leather, but he perceiuing it to be a ſmall trifle, went to the deceiuer, alleaging that he was beguyled, wherefore he

threatned to hang him, excepte he reſtored the .x. Crownes. Why (quod the deceiuer) didſte thou craftely & falſely ſay it was thine? and he caught holde on his hande, and would haue brought him before the Maior to trie their honeſtie, but the marchant plucked backe his hand and ran away.
               
               
                  63 Of a Fox caught by a Dog, whiles ſhe fained hir ſelfe deade.
                  A Foxe counterfeyting that ſhée was deade, to the ende to entrap the birdes which ſhoulde come to hir as to a dead carcaſe, being walowed in durte, did lie with hir face vpwarde in a fielde, wayting for Choughs and Rauens, and ſuch like gréedy birdes, which ſhée would deuoure. It hapned a dog to come by, which ſnatched at hir, and with his téeth tore hir. Whereat ſhée ſaide: I am worthily ſerued, for whiles I endeuor ſubtilly to catch birds, my ſelfe am caught by an other.
                  
                     MOR. They which lie in waite for other, ought not to be gréeued if they be entrapped them ſelues.
               
               
                  64 Of a Boy and a Theefe.
                  A Boy ſate wéeping on the brinke of a Well, whom a Théefe demaunded the cauſe thereof. Mary (quod he) as I drewe water my roape brake, and a pot of gold is falne in. This théefe beléeuing him, put of his clothes, & lept into the wel to ſéeke it: which, bicauſe he founde not, he came

vp again, where he could neither ſée the Boy nor his cote, for the Boy was gone with it.
                  
                     MOR. He that vſeth deceit, ſomtime is deceiued.
               
               
                  65 Of a Thruſhe.
                  THe Thruſhe made his vaunts that he hadde won the friendſhip of the Swallow, to whom his mother ſayde: Thou arte a foole ſonne, if thou thinke to liue with hir, ſéeing either of you deſireth contrary places, for ſhée abideth in hotte places, but thou in colde.
                  
                     MOR. Make not thoſe thy friendes, whoſe liuing diſagréeth from thine.
               
               
                  66 Of the Aire and the Winde.
                  THe Aire on a time cited the winde before the Iudge and maker of all things, and ſayde: O Lord of all things, beholde and take pitie of me, yée haue placed me Princelike inough, for which I giue you thanks, bicauſe ye haue appointed me to be the life of all liuing things, but heerein I was deceiued, for this Winde dothe make me ſo colde and intemperate, therefore I ſay to him, if he preſume from hencefoorth to blowe vpon me, I will choke him: to whome the Creator ſaide: Aire thou ſayeſt ill, though the winde make thée colde and toſſe thée, yet he maketh thée holeſome and temperate. If the winde blewe not on thée, thou ſhouldeſt be corrupt, lothſome, infected and hated of all men: wherfore thou oughteſt to loue

him which preſerueth thy health, wherewith the Aire was at one with the Winde.
                  
                     MOR We ought to loue, and paciently ſuffer them which correct vs.
               
            
            
               Couetouſneſſe.
               
                  67 Of a Trauailer.
                  A Waifaring man hauing trauailed farre, vowed, if he founde any thing to offer the halfe thereof to Mercurius. He found a bag full of Almondes and Dates, which he tooke and eaſe: but the Date ſtones and ſhelles of the Almonds he layde vppon an Altare, ſaying: Thou haſte O Mercurie, my vowe, for with thée I partake both the outſide and the inſide of that I founde.
                  
                     MOR. The Fable is againſte couetous men, which for couetouſneſſe deceiued the Gods.
               
               
                  68 Of a Woman and a Hen.
                  A Certen Widowe had a Henne, which day by day laide an egge, ſhée ſuppoſing, if ſhée gaue hir more Barley, that ſhee wold lay twiſe a day, did ſo: but the Henne being fatte, coulde not lay once a day.
                  
                     MOR. Sometime they looſe the preſent commoditie, which through couetouſneſſe ſéeke after more.
               
               
                  69 Of a couetous man.
                  A Couetous man hauing ſolde all his goodes, made a wedge of golde, which in a certaine place he buryed togither with his ſoule & minde,

to which he daily went to ſée it: One of the work men watching him on a time, & perceiuing what was done, digged vp the wedge and caryed it away: afterwarde he came, who ſéeing the place emptie, began to lament and plucke him ſelfe by the haire. When one ſaw him thus wéeping, and vnderſtoode the cauſe therof, he ſayde: Friend be not ſory, for hauing golde, thou hadſte it not, take therfore a ſtone, and hide it for thy gold: and ſuppoſe that it is golde, and it ſhall be all one to thée, for as I perceiue, when it was golde, thou didſte not occupie it.
                  
                     MOR. It auaileth nothing to be endued with poſſeſſions, except we haue the vſe thereof.
               
               
                  70 Of the Dog and the ſhadowe.
                  AS a Dog by chaunce ſwam ouer the riuer, he caryed in his iawes a péece of fleſh. The Sun then ſhining, as commonly it happeneth, the ſhadowe therof appeared in the water: which when he had ſéene, ſuppoſing it to be another piece of fleſh, ſnatched gréedely therat, and ſo loſt that he had in his iawes. The Dog being ſtroken at the hart, both with the loſſe of his fleſhe, and alſo of his fooliſhe hope, barked thus in his language: Ah wretche, which lackedſt a meaſure in thy grée;edie deſire. Thou hadſt inough and too muche, hadſte thou not doted, nowe through thy follie thou haſt nothing left thée.
                  
                     MOR We are warned of modeſtie and wiſedome,

in deſiring and eſchuing of things, and to vſe a meane in our deſires.
               
               
                  71 Of a couetous Ambaſſadoure.
                  A Certen couetous man being ſent ambaſſador for his countrey to another Citie, there were ſtraight at hande trumpetters to welcome him, and to delight
                        •
                      his eares with muſicke, hoping thereby to fill their purſes with money. He ſente them woord, it was nowe no time to play, bicauſe his hart was heauie for the death of his mother: the Trumpetters deceiued of their purpoſe, departed ſorowing. Then a frend of his hearing of his ſorowe, came to ſée and comfort him, and aſked him, how long it was ſince his mother died? Fortie yeares (quod he,) then his friend vnderſtanding the wilie deceite of the Ambaſſadoure, laughed excéedingly.
                  
                     MOR. This Fable belongeth to couetous men, which ſtudie all the wayes to the woode to ſaue their money.
               
               
                  72 Of a Couetous man dying.
                  AS a couetous man lay a dying, and vnderſtood that at lengthe he ſhould cary nothing with him, he turned him to his friendes and neighbors whome he ſawe preſent, and ſayd: Learne of me, which al my life time haue endeuoured to gather goods, that yée trauaile not too muche to heape vp riches: for of ſo many Acres of lande, of ſo muche

precious apparell which with ſo great ſweating, I haue gotte, I ſhall haue but a hole of fiue foote, and one ſhéete, wherewith being dead, I ſhall be couered.
                  
                     MOR. It is a fooliſhe and miſerable thing to beſtowe ſo muche laboure in gathering of goods, which (whether we will or not) we muſt quickly leaue.
               
               
                  92 Of a couetous man that eate withered Apples.
                  A Couetous man hadde gathered many Apples and faire, ſuche as the Poets reporte to haue bin in the Gardins of Alcinous and the Hesperians: which he did ſo ſpare, that he durſt eat none, except they began to periſhe. His ſonne being very liberall, broughte his fellowes very often into the Apple loftes, ſaying: Take of theſe what yée wil, but touche not them that are periſhed, for my father wil haue them ſerued always after meat, which thing they willingly obeyed.
                  
                     MOR. Nothing is more miſerable than a couetous man which kéepeth for others that which God hath lent him to vſe.
               
            
            
               Couetous Prelates.
               
                  73 Of a leſter and a Biſhop.
                  A Certen Ieſter came in the Calendes of Ianuarie to a Biſhop, who was very rich, but couetous: Of whome he begged a piece of

golde for a Newe yeares gift. This Prelate ſaid that he was madde, in that he ſuppoſed to haue ſo much mony giuen him for a new yeres gift. Thē the fellowe begged a piece of ſiluer, but he ſaide that was too much. Again, he required of him the leaſt coine of Braſſe: but when he could not obtaine that, he ſayd: I pray thée yet (reuerende father) at the leaſte, beſtowe thy bliſſing on me inſtead of a preſent. Then ſaid the Biſhop: Knéele downe ſonne that I may bliſſe thée. Nay, then (quod hée) I care not for your bliſſing, if it be ſo good cheape, for if it had bene worthe a farthing, you would not haue graunted it to me.
                  
                     MOR This is againſt Biſhops and Prieſtes, which ſette more by riches than all holy miſteries of the Church.
               
               
                  74 Of a Prieſt which buryed his Dog.
                  A Countrey Prieſte dwelling in Tuſcia, who was very rich, had a little Dogge whome he bearely loued: which, when it dyed, he buryed in the Churchyarde. Whereof the Byſhoppe of that Dioceſſe being aduertyſed, and being couetous, ſuppoſyng thereby to gette ſome great ſumme of money, there vppon hée ſummoned the Prieſte to appeare before hym. He knowinge well the pretence of the Byſhoppe, tooke wyth hym fiftye pieces of Golde, and came to

the Biſhop, who laid ſore to his charge the burying of his Dogge, for which he commaunded him to priſone. The Prieſt (as he was riche) ſo being wittie withall, humbly anſwered him, ſaying: Reuerend Father, if your holyneſſe vnderſtoode the ſinguler wiſedome of my Dogge, yee woulde nothing maruell that he was buried amongſte men: For his wit paſſed mannes reaſon, as well in his life time as at the hour of his death. What is this (quod the Biſhop) that thou ſayſt? Forſoth (quod the Prieſt) he made a Will at his latter end, and knowing your neceſſitie, he bequeathed you fiftie pieces of golde, which I haue broughte with me. The Biſhop, when he had receiued the money (being well pleaſed) ſent away the Prieſt vnpuniſhed.
               
            
            
               Counſell.
               
                  75 Of the Owle.
                  SOmetime the moſt part of birds went to the Owle, and deſired hir no longer to abyde in holes of houſes, but rather in the boughes of trées where is ſwéeter ſinging. And incontinently they ſhewed hir a yong Oke newe ſprong vp, ſmal and tender, where ſhée might ſit very ſoftly, and build hir neſt: ſhée would not agrée thereto, but gaue them counſell not to credite the yong plant, for it would beare in time to come, birdelime, which would be their deſtruction. They being

a light kinde of birds and often flitting, deſpiſed the good counſell of the Owle: but when the Oke was growen, it was brode & full of boughs: then the Birdes togither did flie amongſte the boughes, there they tooke their pleaſure, hopped vp and downe, played and ſong togither. In the meane time the Oke broughte forthe Birdlime. Then the ſmall birdes all too late repented, that they refuſed that holſome counſell: and this is the cauſe (men ſay) why al birds, aſſone as they ſée ye Owle, come cluſtering about hir, folow hir, ſitte about hir and flie with hir, for they remembring that counſell, accounte hir wiſe, and come aboute hir by flockes, that they might learne wiſedome and knowledge of hir.
                  
                     MOR Deſpiſe not the counſell of him that giueth it a right.
               
            
            
               Counſell for priuate gaine.
               
                  76 Of a Foxe.
                  A Foxe being caught in a ſnare, when ſhée had eſcaped with hir taile cutte off, was aſhamed of hir life, wherevppon ſhée pretended to perſuade other Foxes thereto, ſo as by a common miſchéefe ſhée might couer hir owne ſhame: When ſhée had aſſembled them all togither, ſhée counſelled them to cutte off their tailes, alleaging that they were not onely vncomely, but alſo a ſuperfluous burthen: One of the Foxes aunſwered

hir: Truely ſiſter, if this thing were not onely for thy profite, thou wouldeſt not counſell vs thereto.
                  
                     MOR Wicked menne giue counſell to theyr neighboures for no good will, but for theyr owne aduantage.
               
            
            
               Craftie men.
               
                  77 Of the Lyon and the Gote.
                  A Lion by chaunce eſpied a Gote vpon an high rocke, whome he counſelled rather to come downe and féede in the gréene medow: ſo would I ſayd the gote, if thou were thence, for thou géeueſt me counſel, not for my pleaſure, but to ſlake thy hunger.
                  
                     MOR. Credit not euery mannes talke, for ſome counſel not to profit thée, but themſelues.
               
            
            
               Craftie men.
               
                  78 Of a Fox taken by a Countryman.
                  A Foxe being taken by a countryman, of whoſe Hennes he had killed many, with flattering woords beſought him to ſet him at libertie, ſwearing deuoutly that thencefoorthe he would neuer doe him harme. The Countryman anſwered, I would willingly forgiue thée, and let thée go ſafe and ſounde, but that I knowe thée to be craftie, and a promiſſe breaker, and I certenly knowe, that thou canſt not hinder me being deade, but I miſtruſt thée being aliue.
                  
                     
                     MOR. We muſte giue no credite to falſe and craftie men.
               
            
            
               Craf
                     •
                  e of women.
               
                  79 Of a Woman that would die for hir Husband.
                  A Certaine chaſt Matrone that loued hir huſbande wel, was grieued at the heart for the ſickeneſſe of him, wéeping and mourning muche: and bicauſe hir heartie good will mighte appeare the more, ſhée beſought deathe, if néedes he would haue hir Huſbande, rather too take hir and to excuſe him: whiles ſhée thus ſpake, ſhée eſpied death with his lothſome lookes approching, wherewith ſhee being agaſte, and already repenting, ſaid: I am not that body which thou ſéekeſt, he lieth in the bed whome thou cammeſt to ſlea.
                  
                     MOR. No man loueth his friend ſo well, but he loueth him ſelfe better: Neare is my coate, but nearer is my ſkin.
               
            
            
               Crueltie requited.
               
                  80 Of a Lyon being olde.
                  THer was a Lion which in his youth through his fierceneſſe had purchaſed the diſpleaſure of many: whereof in his olde age he receyued iuſt puniſhment. Euery beaſt in recompence of theyr hurte requited his quarell: The Bore wyth hys Tuſke, the Bull ſtrake him wyth hys bornes, and eſpecially the Aſſe, béeing inflamed to caſte off the name of a cowarde) wyth

chiding and kicking, couragiouſly did beate him. The Lion then wayling lamentably ſaid: Thoſe whome ſometime I haue hurte, paye me againe with the ſame meaſure, and not without a cauſe: Againe, thoſe to whome ſometime I haue done good, requite not nowe my goodneſſe, but rather vniuſtly are my foes: great was my follie when I made ſo many my enemies, but greater, in that I truſted falſe friendes.
                  
                     MOR. When thou art in proſperous eſtate, be not loftie nor fierce, if fortune once frowne or looke awry, they whom thou haſt hurte, ſhall reuenge their quarell: if thou haue fréends, put a difference betwéene them, ſome are fréends not to thée, but to thy table, and to thy fortune, which as the wynd▪ turneth, will turne, and happie ſhalt thou be if they be not thy foes. As Ouid complayneth not without cauſe.
                  
                     VVhen proſprous vvindes did driue my ſailes,
                     of Frendes I had good ſtore,
                     But all vvere gone, vvhen raging Seas
                     by bluſtring vvindes did rore.
                  
               
            
            
               Courage.
               
                   81 Of the Hares and the Frogs.
                  IT hapned that Hares hearing a ſtraunge roaring in the woode, all trembling began ſwiftly to runne away: In running they ſtayed at a mariſhe, being in dout what to doe, ſéeing danger

on euery ſide: and to encreaſe their feare, they eſpied Frogs there drowned. Then one wiſer than the reſt, ſayd: Wherfore are we ſo fondly afraid? Lette vs take a good harte, for ſwiftneſſe in running we lacke not, but onely a couragious ſtomacke, as for this hurly burly we néed not feare, but ſet it lighte.
                  
                     MOR. In all things take a good hart: ſtrength without courage is but dead: for the chéefe heade of ſtrength is hardineſſe.
               
            
            
               Curſing.
               
                  82 Of the Bee and Iupiter.
                  THe Bée which as men thinke, was the firſt maker of Waxe, came ſometime to ſacrifice to the Gods, whoſe oblation to Iupiter, was a houſe of Honey, wherewith Iupiter reioyſing, commaunded hir petition whatſoeuer it were, to be graunted. Then the Bée aſked thus: moſte puiſſant God of all Gods, I beſéeche thée graunt to thy handmaide, that who ſo euer commeth to the hiue, to ſteale away hir Honey, may forthewith die as I haue pricked him. Iupiter being abaſhed at hir requeſt, bicauſe he loued mankinde farre aboue all other, at lengthe ſayde to hir: Be thou contente if thou ſting him that ſteateth thy hony, that thou maiſte leeſe thy ſting and forthewith die, and that in thy ſting thy life may lie.
                  
                     MOR. We curſe our enemies, but it commonly

lighteth on our owne heades.
               
            
            
               Daunger.
               
                  83 Of a Hart and a Lyon.
                  A Harte eſcaping Hunters, entred a caue, where he chaunced on a Lyon, by whome he was taken: As he was dying, he ſayde: Woe is me, that fléeing from men, haue hapned on the cruelleſt of all beaſtes.
                  
                     MOR. Many men auoiding ſmal dangers, run into great.
               
               
                  84 Of the Towne Dogs.
                  A Great route of Towne dogges courſed ſore a Countrey dogge which ran away, and durſte not reſiſt: at the laſt he turned again, and ſhewed his téethe to them, then they all ſtoode ſtill, and durſt not come néere him, where as the Captaine generall of the hoſte was preſent, who turned to his ſouldiers, and ſayd: Felowes, this ſight warneth vs not to flée, ſeeing we ſée more daunger to them that run away, than to thoſe that reſiſt.
               
            
            
               Dealing.
               
                  85 Of two Pots.
                  TWo Pottes ſtoode togither on a banke, the one was of earth, the other of Braſſe, which bothe were ſodeinly caughte by the force of the ſtreames, the earthen Pot fearing to be broken went ſwiftlieſt, whom the Braſen pot comforted,

willing him to feare nothing: for he could take héede inough, that they ſhould not knocke togither. Nay (ſayd the other) I know wel inough, whether the Riuer beate thée againſte me, or me againſte thée, I ſhall be in hazarde on euery ſide. Therfore haue I determined to kéepe no companie with thée.
                  
                     MOR. Better it is to deale with thy fellowe, than with thy better, for the mightier man can ſooner hurt thée, than thou him.
               
            
            
               Death.
               
                  86 Of the Swanne ſinging at the poynt of death.
                  A Swanne being néere at the poynt of death, was aſked of the Storke, why he ſoong ſweter, being nigh his deathe, (which all other beaſtes doe ſo much hate) than in all his life time before, ſéeing at that time he ought to be ſorie: the Swanne aunſwered: Bycauſe from hencefoorthe I ſhal not be troubled with ſéeking for meat, nether ſhall I néede to feare the Foulers ginne.
                  
                     MOR. We are warned héereby not to feare death, being by that berefte from all miſeries.
               
               
                  87 Of an Olde man which ſet trees.
                  A Man of very olde age, was mocked of a yong man, bicauſe he plāted trées, wherof he ſhuld neuer ſée fruite: The olde man aunſwered: Neyther thou perhappes ſhalte gather fruite of thoſe

which thou goeſt about to ſette. Shortly after the yong man fell oute of a trée, which he climbed to gather heries, and brake his necke.
                  
                     MOR. Death ſpareth no age.
               
            
            
               Deceite.
               
                  88 Of the Dog and the Cocke.
                  THe Dogge and the Cocke entred friendſhip and iorneyd togither: whē night drue néere, the Cocke flew vp into a trée, and reſted, but the dogge ſlept at the roote of the hollowe trée. It hapned that the Cocke, as he was wonte, crowed in the night ſeaſon, whome the Fox hearing, ran towarde him, and as he ſtoode on the grounde, he prayed the Cocke to come downe, bycauſe he greatly deſired to embrace ſo trimme a ſinging bird: the Cocke bad him that he ſhould firſt wake the porter, which ſlept at the roote of the trée, and that when he had opened he would come downe: as the Foxe ſoughte meanes too call him vp, the Dog ſtarte vp and tore him in pieces.
                  
                     MOR. Wiſe men wil by pollicie ſend their enimies to mightier than themſelues.
               
            
            
               Deceitfull perſons.
               
                  89 Of a Frier, a Layman and the Wolfe.
                  A Certaine religions man of the order of S. Anthonie, begged of a Huſbandman a portion of corne, for which he promiſed to warrant all that he had, eſpecially that his ſhéepe that

yere ſhoulde be ſafe. The countreyman giuing credite to his promiſes, lette his ſhéepe ſtray abrode where they liſt, wherof the greateſt number a Wolfe deſtroyed: the Farmer therewith chafing, when the next yere the gatherer came for corne, did not onely deny him his almes, but alſo blamed him for his fooliſh promiſes. Why what is the matter (quod he?) The other aunſwered, his ſhéepe were deſtroyed by the wolfe. What the Wolfe? (ſayde he) ſurely that is a naughty beaſt, truſt him not, but beware of him: for he would not onely deceiue S. Anthony but alſo Chryſt him ſelfe, if he could. It is therefore follie to credit thoſe whoſe mark that they ſhoote at is onely to deceiue.
               
            
            
               Deſerts rewarded.
               
                  90 Of a Parate.
                  A Parate béeing brought out of the Eaſt parts into the Weſt, where no ſuche Birdes are wont to bréede, maruelled that he was more eſtéemed there, than in his natiue countrey: for he was kept in a Cage of yuorie wrought with Siluer wyre, fed with moſt ſwéete meat, which thing happened not to other birdes of the Weſt partes, which in beautie and ſpeaking as farre excelled. Then the Turtle béeing ſhut vp in the ſame cage, ſayde: this is not maruell worthy, for no man in his owne countrey is rewarded

as he deſerueth.
               
            
            
               Deſire of new things.
               
                  91 Of an Aſſe
                  SOmtime an Aſſe ſerued a Gardener, of whoſe crueltie he complayned to Iupiter, beſéechyng hym to haue a new maiſter. Iupiter graunted hys requeſt, and put hym to a Tyler, whom bycauſe he laded him with much heauier burdens, he miſlyked: He therefore prayed Iupiter yet once agayne, to ſhift hys ſeruice from hym to a gentler Maiſter. The God ſmyled at hys folly, yet the Aſſe continued ſo long an earneſt ſuter, that he forced hym thereto. Then he ſerued a Curryer, whoſe trade when the Aſſe had well perceiued, he repented, ſaying: Ah wretch that I am, which can be contented with no maiſter, for now I haue got ſuche a one, which as I ſuppoſe, will alſo curry my ſkinne.
                  
                     MOR. Things preſent we neuer allow, but ſéeke for new.
               
            
            
               Dyet.
               
                  92 Of a Pacient and a Phyſitian.
                  A Phyſitian tooke vpon him to cure a Pacient, who at length dyed: then ſayde he to the Pacients kinſfolke: this man caſt him ſelfe away for lacke of good dyet.
                  
                     MOR. He that vſeth quaffing and liueth inordinately, ſhall neuer be olde, or elſe ſhall haue a

very ſhorte lyfe.
               
            
            
               Dignitie.
               
                  93 Of an Aſse carying an Image.
                  AN Aſſe caryed an Image of ſiluer on hys ſhoulders, which euery one that met it, dyd worſhip: wherwith beeing inſolent, he would no longer be an Aſſe: then was it tolde him that he was no God, but caryed an Idoll.
                  
                     MOR. They that are placed in dignitie ought to know that they are men.
               
               
                  94 Of the Frog and the Crab.
                  A Frogge ſéeing a Crabbe ſwimming by the water ſide, ſayd: What is he ſo ill fauoured and foule, that dare trouble my water? ſéeing I am mightie and ſtrong, I will put him to flight. When he had ſo ſayd, he lepte vppon the Crab, ſaying: why waſt not thou aſhamed O wretch, to enter into my reſting place? Dyddeſt not thou bluſh béeing ſo foule and ſo blacke, to defile the cleare water? The Crab, as his maner is, began to go backe and ſayde: I pray thée ſiſter ſay not ſo, for I would be at one with thée, therfore come not thus vppon me. The Frog ſéeing him go back, ſuppoſed that he did it for feare of him, wherby he waxed more fierce agaynſt him, ſaying: Drawe not backe thou filthe, for thou mayeſt not eſcape, this day will I giue thy fleſh to the fiſh, & incontinent he ſkipped vpon him to

kill him. The Crab ſéeing the preſent daunger turned about, and with his clawes byt the Frog and tore him in péeces.
                  
                     MOR. Euery man, as muche as in him lieth, let him ſtudie to auoyde warre and diſcorde.
               
               
                  95 Of a Leoparde and an Vnicorne fighting with a Dragon.
                  THe Leopard ſometime fought with a Dragon, agaynſt whom (bicauſe he could not preuayle) he beſought the Vnicorne to ayde him, and ſayd: Thou art a godly beaſt, expert in fighting and valiaunt, wherefore I pray thée helpe me. The Vnicorne hearing this commendation of him ſelfe, anſwered: Thou ſayeſt truth, for I haue ſkill in fighting, and therfore I will valyauntly defende thée, for when the Dragon ſhall open his mouth, I wil thruſt him into the throte with my horne. When they were both come to the Dragon, the Leoparde gaue the onſet, truſting to the ſtrength of the Vnicorne, but the Dragon fought with them and ſpit fire at them. The Vnicorne ſéeing him open his mouth, ran haſtely to thruſt him through, but he caſte hys heade at one 
                        ••
                     de, whereby the Vnicorne miſſing him, ſmote his horne faſte into the ground and dyed.
                  
                     MOR He that will fight for another, ſéeketh his owne deſtruction.
               
            
            
               
               Despite.
               
                  96 Of the enuious Dogge and the Oxe.
                  A Dogge lay ſléeping in a racke full of hey, thyther came an Oxe to féede. The Dogge ſéeing him comming, barked & forbad him. To whom the Oxe ſayd: the Diuell choke thée with this thy deſpite, which neither canſt eate hey thy ſelfe, nor yet will ſuffer me.
                  
                     MOR Many are of that diſpoſition, that they will grudge others that, which they for lacke of wit can not attayne vnto.
               
            
            
               
                  Despiſe nothing. 97 Of a yong man.
               A Certayne yong man eſpied an olde man gooing crooked like a bent bow, whom he aſked if he woulde ſell a bowe? Haſte thou (quod he) any néede to looſe thy money? If thou liue till my age, nature ſhal giue thée a bow without money.
               
                  MOR. The faults of age are not to be laughed at, bicauſe no man, if he liue, can eſcape it.
            
            
               98 Of a Countreyman and Peares.
               A Certayne gluttonous man tooke his iourney to goe to a wedding wherevnto he was bidden. By the way he founde an heape of peares, but none of them he touched, albeit he was excéeding hungry, which in contempt he made water on, for he thought ſcorne of ſuch meate, gooing to ſo good chéere. But as he paſſed on his way, he

came to a ſtreame lately riſen with rayne, whiche without daunger of life he coulde not paſſe ouer, therefore he returned home agayne: and by the way he was ſo hungry (bycauſe of his long faſting) that if he had not eaten the peares that he piſſed on, ſéeing there was nothing elſe, he had famyſhed.
               
                  MOR. Deſpiſe nothing, for what is ſo vyle or baſe, that will not at one time or another ſerue for ſome purpoſe?
            
            
               Disprayſers of Phiſike.
               
                  99 Of a man that refuſed Clyſters.
                  A Certen rich German fell ſick, to whom came many Phiſitians to cure hym, (for to hony come flyes by heapes) amongſt whom one helde opinion that he muſte take a Clyſter, if he would recouer his health: the Pacient hearing this (bicauſe he had neuer taken any ſuch medicine) was wood angry, and commaunded all the Phiſitians to be put out of doores, ſaying that they were mad, which woulde miniſter to hys tayle, when hys head aked.
                  
                     MOR. All holſome things ſéeme tedious to them which neueh aſſayed them.
               
            
            
               Diſſemblers.
               
                  100 Of a Deceiuer.
                  A Certeine poore man béeing ſick, vowed to the Gods, if he might recouer his health, an hundred

Oxen in ſacrifice: the Gods (bicauſe they would try him) made him whole. When he was well, bycauſe he had no Oxen, he made an hundred Oxen of paſte, which on the Altar he ſacrificed. The Gods meaning to puniſh him therefore, appeared to him in a dreame, and ſayd: Go to the ſea ſhore in ſuche a place and there thou ſhalt finde an hundred talents of golde. This fellow when he awaked, reioyſing gretly, went to the place that was ſhewed him and ſought for it, where he was taken by Pirates, whome he prayed for his libertie, promiſing them a M. talents of golde, but to him they gaue no credit, but caried him away & ſold him for a M. grotes.
                  
                     MOR. God hateth diſſemblers and lyers.
               
            
            
               Diſſimulation.
               
                  101 Of a Cat and Myſe.
                  A Cat hearing that there were many Miſe in a certayne houſe, came thyther: of whych, thoſe that ſhe caught ſhe deuoured: The Myſe ſéeing them ſelues dayly diminiſhed, agréed togither to come down no more, leaſt they ſhould all be deſtroyed: for if the Cat come not hither (ſayd they) we ſhall be ſafe. The Cat perceiuing the miſe deſcended not, thought by deceit to take them, and climbed vp on a beame, whereon ſhe hanged hir ſelf, fayning to be dead, whom one of the Miſe, as he looked downward eſpied, & ſayde

to him: verily my frende, though I knewe thou were dead, yet would I not come downe.
                  
                     MOR. A wiſe man once deceiued through the falſhode of a wicked man, will neuer after credite his diſſimulation.
               
               
                  102 Of the Wolfe and the Sheepe.
                  A Wolfe béeing bitten by Dogges, and euill entreated, lay proſtrate along: he lackyng meate, eſpied a Shéepe, whome he deſired to bring him ſome of the running water to drinke, ſaying: If thou wilt giue me drinke, I wil prouide meate my ſelfe: ſhe aunſwered: if I giue thée drinke, thou wilt eate me.
                  
                     MOR. This Fable is agaynſt an euill body, which by diſſimulation lyeth in wayte.
               
               
                  103 Of the ſicke Aſſe.
                  THe reporte was, that the Aſſe lay ſicke, nigh at the poynte of death, there came bothe the wolues & Dogs to viſite him, and demaunded of his Sonne, how hys Father dyd, he anſwered (looking through the chinkes of the doore) better than ye would.
                  
                     MOR. This Fable ſpeaketh of them that faine to take heauily the death of other, where as they wiſhe them dead long before.
               
               
                  140 Of a Foxe.
                  A Foxe came into a Vyneyard where he eſpied fayre cluſters of Grapes which were rype,

of them fayne would he eate, and bycauſe they were paſt his reach, he thought to find ſome ſhift to gette them: but perceiuing his labour to be loſt, and that by no meanes he could ſatiſfie hys deſire, he turned his ſorowe into ioy, ſaying: Thoſe Cluſters be yet to ſoure to eate, for they would ſet my téeth on edge.
                  
                     MOR. It is wiſdome to diſſēble that he careth not for that which he knoweth he can not get.
               
               
                  105 Of a man that would kill a Hogge.
                  IT was a cuſtome in a certaine Citie of Picene in Italie, that he which killed a Hog in Winter, ſhould bid hys neighbours to ſupper. Now there was one which minded to kill a Hog, but lothe he was to bée at any charges, wherevpon he aſked the aduiſe of his Godfather, howe he might thifte off the expences. Tell abroad (quod he) to morrow, that this night there was a Hog ſtollen from thée. It happened the ſame nyght, (he nothing miſtruſting it) that one verily conueyed a Hogge from him. In the morning when he roſe, he looked for his hogges, wherof miſſing one, he went incontinent to his Godfather, and cryed aloude, that one of his Hogges were ſtollen. Well doone (quod he) thou playeſt the wiſe fellow, for ſo I taught thée to ſpeake: the other ſwore by all the Gods he did not lye. I conne thée thanke (ſayd his Godfather) thou followeſt

wel my coūſel. The other for al that did ſweare and ſtare the more that it was true. Thou art to be commended (quod he) for I forewarned thée ſo to ſay, & my counſell was good. The other ſéeing him ſelfe thus flouted, departed heauily.
               
            
            
               Diſobedience.
               
                  106 Of the Egle that cited all maner of birdes.
                  THe Egle called togither all maner of wyldefoule: which béeing aſſembled, as he corrected certayne faultes, there came Hunters which ſet abroade their nets to catch the birds. The Egle ſéeing the preſent daunger, made proclamation by his criers, that al ſhould folow the baner of the Egle, and flie with hir, if they would eſcape: then as many as flewe with hir eſcaped, but ſome gluttonous & diſobedient, who beholding the pray & coueting it, flew into the nettes, wherin being entangled, they cried piteouſly.
                  
                     MOR. Hee that wyll not obey, falleth into miſchiefe.
               
            
            
               Double tonged.
               
                  107 Of a Satyre and a wayfaring man.
                  A Satyr, which in olde time was counted God of the woods, walking abroade, found a wayfaring man couered with ſnow and nighe dead with cold: on whom taking pitie, he brought him into his den, and made a fire & cheriſhed him. It hapned that the Satyr eſpied him breathing on

his hands, wherof demaunding the cauſe, he anſwered: to heate his hands. And being ſet down to meate, the traueler blowed on fryed barley that was on his trencher. He aſked agayn, why he did ſo? to coole it (quod he.) Then the Satyr draue him out of his denne, and told him that he wold harbor none that had ſo variable a mouth.
                  
                     MOR Deale not with that man, which hath a double hart, or is vnſtable in his words.
               
            
            
               Doubt the worst.
               
                  108 Of a Pye and a Cuckowe.
                  A Pie eſpying a Cuckow lurking amongſt the boughes of a trée, ſuppoſed it to be a Hauke, wherwith being moued, flew away: which thing other Birds néere at hande beholding, mocked the Pie, that in ſtead of a Hauke, ſhe flew from the Cuckow, ſhe anſwered: I had rather be mocked of you, than my friends ſhould wepe for me,
                  
                     MOR. It is better to miniſter occaſion for our foes to laugh at, than our friends to wéepe at.
               
            
            
               Dredfulneſſe.
               
                  109 Of a Serpent.
                  A Serpent béeing troden vpon by many, made his moane to Iupiter, but he ſayd to him: If thou hadſt ſtinged him which firſt kicked thée, the next would neuer haue attempted it.
                  
                     MOR. They which withſtande their aſſaulters, become a terror to others.
               
            
            
               
               Dread without neede.
               
                  110 Of the rule of women of their husbands.
                  A Certaine man caried aboute throughe the whole worlde a payre of bootes, whiche he would giue that man who feared not hys wife. He could finde none a great while, whych would take them. But at length a countreyman receiued them, to whom he ſayde: Soft let me put them in thy boſome and wype them. But the countreymā (bicauſe his ſhirt was new & white) ſaid: I dare not leſt my wife taūt me for blacking my ſhirt: then he toke away the bootes & bet him therwith, ſaying: Get thée hence in the Diuels name, bicauſe thou dreadeſt thy wife for a little trifle, yu didſt meane to deceiue me of my bootes, and he ſtraightway departed. But I thinke he hath not yet beſtowed them iuſtly of any man.
               
            
            
               Dronkenneſſe.
               
                  111 Of a woman.
                  A Certen woman had a dronkard to hir huſbād, from which vice (bicauſe ſhe would rid him) ſhe vſed this policie: She watched him when he was dronken heauy aſléepe, and like a dead man without féeling, & tooke him on hir ſhoulders, caried him into the churchyard, laid him in a graue and departed. When ſhe ſuppoſed that he was ſober, ſhe knocked at the heade of the tombe, who aſked who knocketh at the doore: hys wife

aunſwered, I am here, and haue brought meate for the dead. Ah (quod he) bring me rather ſome drink than meat, thou doeſt trouble me in ſpeaking of meat & no drink. The good womā ſtroke hir breaſt & ſayd, woe is me wretch, for my craft will doo no good: thou my huſbande art nothing mended, but become worſe, ſo that this diſeaſe hath got an habite in thée.
                  
                     MOR. We muſt not continue in euill déedes, for cuſtome ſometime creepeth on a man.
               
            
            
               Dulspirited.
               
                  112 Of the Bore and the Countreyman.
                  THere was a Bore which routed vp the corne, whoſe eare a countreyman cut off. It chaunced he came the ſeconde time, then he cut off his other eare. When he came yet againe, he caught him & caried him into the citie & gaue it his Attorney to make mery withal. At the feaſt when he was brokē vp, his hart was not found. Then his maiſter was wroth with the cooke therfore. Sir (quod the countreyman) it is no maruel that his hart is not here, for I think the fooliſh Bore had no hart, for if he had had any, he woulde not haue come ſo oft into my corn to his coſt. Thē al the geſts laugheſt excéedingly at his fooliſhneſſe.
                  
                     MOR. Many liue ſo without ſpirite or boldeneſſe, that it is doubtefull whether they haue a harte or not.
               
            
            
               
               Education of youth.
               
                  113 Of a Gnat.
                  A Gnat in the Winter ſeaſon, ſuppoſing that he ſhould die for hunger and colde, came to a Hyue of Bées, of whome he deſired meate and lodging, promiſing (if they would graūt it him) to teach their children the arte of Muſike. Then one of the Bées anſwered: I had rather my children learned ſome trade which can kéepe them from hunger and colde.
                  
                     MOR. We are warned to bring vp our children in thoſe ſciences, wherby they may be able to get their liuing.
               
            
            
               Enimie.
               
                  114 Of a Noriſher of Bees.
                  A Certen man, when the Owner was abſent, came to the place where hony was made, & ſtole away an hony combe: the owner at his returne ſéeing the hyues emptie, ſtoode vp & ſought if ought were left. The Bées returning fro féeding, and finding him there, pricked him wyth their ſtings, and handled him very ill. Then he ſayd to them: O vyle beaſts, which haue let eſcape vnhurte him which hath ſtollen your honycombs, and ſtrike me which take care ouer you.
                  
                     MOR. Some men through follie can not beware of their enimies, and dryue backe their friends, as ſuch that lay awayte to deceiue.
               
               
                  
                  115 Of many creeping Wormes and Beaſtes.
                  MAny créeping beaſtes ſat ſunning, amongſt whom the cockatrice was, who cried aloud, Who ſo dare fight with me, let him come foorth. The Snayle came foorthe to ſighte with hir: as they were togither ſtriuing, the Cockatrice would haue byt the Snayle, and poyſoned hym, but he drew his head into his ſhel that ſhe could not touch him, afterward ye Snayle came foorth and byt the ſerpent, wherby ſhe was ouercome. Not long after, ſhe béeing agayne encoraged, excuſed hir ſelfe, that ſhe was not valiantly ouerthrowen: wherfore ſhe ſayd: If there were any other warrior amongſt them, ſhe would reuēge hir ſelf, and make him run away. The Hedgehog hearing this came foorth, who was full of prickles, whō the Serpent aſſaulted, but the Hedgehog, pricked hir ſore, and wounded hir, whereof ſhe was aſhamed: but a Frog willing to be reuenged of the Serpente, went on hir, & would haue ſlaine hir, but ſhe though wearie, hardened hir heart, and tooke the Frog, and deuoured him.
                  
                     MOR. He is a foole which béeing vnarmed, wil aſſault his enimie.
               
               
                  116 Of the Kings fiſher.
                  THe kings fiſher is a ſolitary bird, always liuing in the ſea, which as is ſayd, taketh héede of mens huntings, & therefore buyldeth hir neſt

vpon the rocks in the ſea, who on a time béeing ready to breede, did make hir neſt: As ſhe was gone out to hir paſtime, it chaunced the ſea to ariſe (béeing ſtirred with a boyſterous winde) aboue hir neſt, which béeing drowned, hir yong ones periſhed. She at hir returne, ſéeing what had happened, ſayde: Wo is me wretch, which fearing to be betrayed on lande, haue runne to this which is more deceitfull.
                  
                     MOR. Some men taking héede of their foes, doo vnwittingly happen vppon friends who are much crueller than their enimies.
               
               
                  117 Of the Henne and the Foxe.
                  A Foxe entred into a pultrie houſe, where he ſaw a Hen on hir neſt béeing ſicke, whom he aſked, how ſhe did: Ah (quod the Hen) I ſhould do much better (ſiſter) were thou gone.
                  
                     MOR. The preſence of our enimies dothe muche hurt vs.
               
               
                  118 Of two enimies.
                  TWo men hating one another deadly, ſayled togither in one ſhip, whereof the one ſate in the foreparte of the ſhip, the other in the hinder part therof, ſodenly there aroſe a tempeſt, which put the ſhip in hazard: thē he that ſate in ye ſterne aſked the maiſter which part of the ſhip ſhould firſt be drouned, the ſterne (quod he) thē he ſaid: My death ſhall nothing gréene me, if I may ſée

mine enimie die before me.
                  
                     MOR. Many men care not what harme they haue, ſo that they may ſée their ennimies before them hurte.
               
               
                  119 Of the Crow and the Rauen.
                  THe Crowe enuied the Rauen, bicauſe by him men tooke diuination, for which he was ſuppoſed to forſhew things to come: wherupon eſpying trauailers by, ſhe flew vp into a trée, where ſhée ſtoode and cried like a Rauen: They at hir crying turning aſide and wondring, at the laſte vnderſtanding the truthe, one of them ſayde: Let vs be going fellowes, it was the Crow that cryed, and ſhée hathe no ſoothſaying.
                  
                     MOR. Thoſe men which ſtriue with their betters, beſides that they are neuer able too matche them, deſerue to be laughed at.
               
            
            
               Enuie.
               
                  120 Of the Wolfe and the Fox.
                  THe Wolfe hauing much prouiſion of meat, liued at eaſe, to whome the Foxe came and demaunded the cauſe of his eaſe: the Wolfe perceiuing that he enuied his good fare, fained ſickneſſe to be the cauſe therof, and he prayed the Foxe, to beſéeche the Gods for his healthe: The Foxe being grieued that his purpoſe woulde not proſper, went to a Shepeherd, and willed him to go to the Wolues den, where ſodainly he might

take his enimie that liued void of care: the ſhepherde aſſaulted the Wolfe, & ſlue him, the Fox poſſeſſed his denne with al the good chéere, but he enioyed it no long time, for the ſame ſhepeherde caught him likewiſe.
                  
                     MOR. Enuie is a lothſeome thing, & hée that is ye cauſe thereof cōmonly maketh a rod for him ſelfe. Horace in his .1. boke of Epiſtles writeth.
                  
                     The enuious man doth grudge to ſee
                     his neighbors goodes ariſe,
                     The Sicil tyrants coulde not vvell
                     a greater plage deuiſe.
                  
               
               
                  121 Of the Couetous man and the Enuious.
                  TWoo men made their prayer to Iupiter, a Couetous man and an enuious, who ſent Apollo to them to ſatiſfy their deſires, he gaue thē free libertie to deſire, vppon this condition, that what ſoeuer the one required, the other ſhoulde receiue duble. The couetous man was long in doute: bycauſe he thought nothing was ynough: at length he aſked no ſmal thing, his companion receyued double ſo muche. The Enuious man requeſted one of his owne eyes to be put out, gretly reioycing that his fellow ſhuld loſe both.
                  
                     MOR. Couetouſneſſe neuer ſayth ho: as for Enuie, nothing is more madde, which wiſheth him ſelfe miſchief to hurte an other withall.
               
               
                  122 Of the Wolfe and the Aſſe.
                  
                     THe Wolfe and the Aſſe were ſawyers together, but the Aſſe wrought aboue, & the wolf beneath, who ſought occaſion to ſlea his fellowe, wherfore he ſayd: Ah wretched Aſſe, why doeſt y• caſt duſt into myne eyes? Forſooth (quod he) I do not, but rule it after my knowledge: if it pleaſe thee to ſawe aboue, I wil beneath. Tuſhe (quoth the Wolfe) I ſée what thou doſt, if thou caſt any more into my eys I wil plucke out thine: when he had thus ſaid the Wolfe blew harde, that the duſt might flie vp into his fellowes eyes, but the timber ſtaying it, it fell into his owne: wherewith being ſore troubled, he ſware, that he wold ouerthrow the porters, but ſodeynly it fell, and kylled the the Wolfe.
                  
                     MOR. Miſchief commonly lighteth vpon the pate of the Author.
               
               
                  123 Of the Lyon and the Wolfe.
                  THe Lyon béeing ſtricken in age fel ſicke, and laye in his denne, all beaſtes ſaue onely the Fox came to viſite their King: Wherevpon the Wolfe hauing oportunitie, accuſed the Fox vnto the Lion, as one that ſet naught by him being their Lorde, for whiche cauſe he came not to ſée him. By chaunce the Foxe came in, and hearde the latter ende of the Wolues tale. Then the Lion roared againſt the Foxe, who incontinent crauing ſpace to make anſwere, ſaid: which of all thoſe that are héere preſent, hathe done ſo muche

good as I, which haue trauailed farre and néere to ſéeke a remedie for thée of the Phiſitian, which I haue learned: Then the Lion commaunding him foorthwith to tel the medicine, he ſayde: The Wolues ſkin being yet aliue, to be plucked from his backe and put warme aboute thée, is the medicine and only remedy. As the wolfe lay along, the Fox laughed at him, ſaying: It becommeth not thée to prouoke thy Lord to wrathe, but to fauoure and good will.
                  
                     MOR. He which continually diggeth pittes, at length turneth him ſelfe therein.
               
            
            
               Euill men.
               
                  124 Of the Cocke and the Cat.
                  A Catte ſometime being hungry, came to deuoure a Cocke, whome bicauſe ſhée had no iuſt cauſe to hurt, laid to his charge his great notſe that he was wonte to make, bicauſe that with his ſhrill crowing, he did lette men of theyr reſt in the night: the Cocke replied that he was thereof giltleſſe, ſéeing by that meanes he raiſed vp men to their daily trauell: It is but loſt labor (ſaid the Cat) to plead thus: for thou treadeſt thy mother, neither art thou ſo cōtent, but thou medleſt with thy ſiſter: the Cocke being ready to purge him ſelf of that fault, the Cat waxed more eger againſt him, ſaying: thou ſtriueſt againſt the ſtreame, for this day I wil be thy prieſt.
                  
                     
                     MOR. If any man would beat a dogge, he ſhall ſoone finde a ſtaffe. The euill man by hooke or by crooke, if he liſt, will throw thée downe.
               
            
            
               Euill for good.
               
                  125 Of the Countryman, and the Serpent.
                  AS a Countrimā walked about his grounds, he found a Serpent in the ſnowe nigh deade with colde, which he pitying much, brought home, and laid him by the fires ſide. The ſerpent by reaſon of the fire come againe to his ſtrength and venime, could no longer endure the heat, but filled all the cottage with his hiſſing. The Countryman gotte vp a ſtake, and ran at him, wherewith he ſtroke him, and then tooke him vp for that diſpleaſure, ſaying: Wilt thou thus recompence my curteſie? Goeſt thou about to deſtroy him that ſaued thy life?
                  
                     MOR. It chanceth often, if a man ſaue a théefe from the gallowes, he wil ſooneſt ſéeke his death, and on whome men beſtowe moſte labor, of him they ſhall reape leaſt good.
               
            
            
               From euill to worſe.
               
                  126 Of a Seruant which caſt his Maſters Aſſe from a Rocke.
                  A Certaine huſbandmannes Seruant, threw downe his maiſters Aſſe headlong from an high Rocke, that he might not daily be forced to driue him too and fro, but he tolde his maiſter,

that he fell downe himſelfe: wherefore his maiſter dyd cauſe him to beare all things on his ſhoulders, whiche the Aſſe was woonte before to carrie. The which thing the euill ſeruant marking, ſaide: I was not well aduiſed when I ſlue my innocent fellow, which eaſed mee of ſo great trauaile, I am thus worthily ſerued.
                  
                     MOR. Whyles fooles would auoyde any euil, they fall into woorſe.
               
            
            
               Exerciſe.
               
                  127 Of the Bat, the Bramble, and the Cormorant.
                  THe Bat, the Bramble, and the Cormoraunte entred fréendſhip togither, and determined to liue lyke marchants, whervppon the Bat borowed money, and ſhipped it, the Bramble toke garmentes, & the Cormorant Braſſe, and ſailed together. It chaunced a greate ſtorme to aryſe, that the ſhip was drowned, & al their goodes loſt, and they eſcaped to lande: ſince which time the Cormorante ſitteth on the ſea ſhore, to ſée if the ſea will caſt vp the Braſſe any where. The Bat fearing his creditours, ſheweth not his head by day lighte, but goeth to féede by nyghte. And the Bramble dothe catche holde of the garments of ſuche as are paſſers by, ſéeking if hée can fynde his owne.
                  
                     MOR. Whereunto wée do apply our ſelues, in tyme to come we followe the ſame.
               
            
            
               
               Experience.
               
                  128 Of the Worme. 
                  THe Worme that lurketh in the durt, went abrode vpon lande, and ſayde to al beaſtes, that ſhe was as learned a phiſitiā for medicines as euer was Poeen phiſitian to the Gods: Why (quoth the Foxe) canſt thou cure others, and canſt not heale thy ſelfe of thy lameneſſe?
                  
                     MOR. All talke is in vaine, except experience haue ben had before.
               
               
                  129 Of Cockels.
                  A Countreymans ſon roſted Cockles, whome as he hearde hiſſing, he ſayde: O euil beaſtes which when your houſen be burnte do ſing.
                  
                     MOR. Al things done out of due order, are to be diſcommended.
               
            
            
               Falſhod in fellowſhip.
               
                  130 Of the Aſſe and the Fox.
                  THe Aſſe and the Foxe béeing entred fréendſhip: went forthe a hunting, whome a Lion meeting, the Foxe ſéeing the preſent daunger, wente to the Lion & promiſed to deliuer the Aſſe into his hands, ſo that ſhe might ſcape ſcotfrée: the Lyon agréed: then ſhe led the Aſſe, and cauſed him to be trapped in a net: but the Lyon ſéeing him ſo faſt, that he might not eſcape, firſte layde holde on the Foxe, and after he ſerued the Aſſe likewiſe.
                  
                     MOR. They which betray their fellowes vndoo them ſelues vnawares.
               
            
            
               
               Falſe witneſſe.
               
                  131 Of the Dogge and the Aſſe.
                  A Bandog (which is able to vanquiſh not only Wolues, but alſo Beares) did iourneye a long way with an Aſſe which caryed a ſacke full of bread. As they went on their way, a tempeſt aroſe, then the Aſſe hapned on a medow, where with good graſſe he filled his belly full: but the Dog deſired the Aſſe to giue him a little péece of bread leaſt he ſterued: he not only denyed him that, but alſo ſcottingly counſelled him to féed on graſſe with him. In the meane time the Aſſe eſpying the Wolfe comming, beſoughte the dogge to aide him. Nay (quod he) thou didſt counſell me to féed on graſſe to ſlake my hunger, ſo I will thée to defende thy ſelfe with thy iron heeles againſt the Wolfe.
                  
                     MOR. They which aide not them which néede helpe, are wont to be deſtitute of the ſuccoure of others in the time of néede.
               
            
            
               Faultes puniſhed.
               
                  132 Of a wicked man and the Diuel.
                  A Wicked man hauing committed many heynous offences, for which he was often apprehended and committed to priſon, where he was kept very ſtraightly, beſought the helpe of a Diuel, which often had aided and deliuered him out of trouble. At lengthe he was taken againe, who

(as he wonted) required ſuccoure of the Diuell: who came to him, carying a gret bundel of ſhoos on his ſhoulders and ſaide, friende, I can helpe thée no longer, for I haue trotted to ſo manye places for thy deliueraunce, that I haue worne out all theſe ſhooes, and I haue no money left me to bye any more, wherefore thou muſte néedes peryſhe.
                  
                     MOR. Let vs not beléeue alwayes to ſcape ſcotfrée with our faultes.
               
            
            
               Familiaritie.
               
                  133 Of a Camell.
                  WHat time the Camel was firſt ſéene, he was much dreaded, and bycauſe of hys hugeneſſe, men fled from him. But in proceſſe of time, his tameneſſe being knowen, they tooke a good hart & came to him: afterward vnderſtanding the beaſtes courage, they ſo farre forthe deſpiſed hym, that they put a bytte in hys mouth, and deliuered him to be driuen by boyes.
                  
                     MOR. Cuſtome and dayly companie, make terrible things to be little ſet by.
               
               
                  134 Of the Foxe and the Lyon.
                  THere was a Foxe which had not ben vſed to the ſight of the Lion, whome when he ſawe by chaunce once or twiſe, he quaked for feare & fled away: As he met him the third time, he ſtood nothing in doubt, but approched & ſaluted him.
                  
                     
                     MOR. Familiar conuerſation maketh men bolde, euen with thoſe whom they were afrayde afore to looke on.
               
            
            
               Feare.
               
                  135 Of the Egle
                  THe Egle for his beautie preferred him ſelf before all other birdes, which thing all dyd affirme that it was true, but the pecock ſaid to him ſelf: the feathers make thée not beautiful, but thy bill and thy talandes, bicauſe none of vs dare contende with thée aboute their beautie for feare of them.
                  
                     MOR. Myghtier mens affaires are prayſed of many, more for feare than truth.
               
               
                  136 Of a Dog fearing the Rayne.
                  A Certein Dog as ofte as it rayned, durſte not come foorth of the houſe, and béeing demaunded of an other Dog why he did ſo, aunſwered: bicauſe ſomtime I was ſcalded wyth hot water.
                  
                     MOR. They which haue taſted of great euils. are afrayde of the ſmalleſt.
               
               
                  137 Of a Cock.
                  A Cock béeing taken by a Foxe, eſcaped from him very hardely. Not long after, he ſawe a Foxes ſkin, wherewith being ſore afraide, ran away, whom other birdes mocked that he was afraid of nothing. Ah (quod he) if ye had ben in the Foxes gripes as I haue ben, ye would be afrayd

of hys foote ſteps, how much more his ſkyn.
                  
                     MOR. They which haue eſcaped great daungers, dread the leaſt.
               
            
            
               Flatterie.
               
                  138 Of a ſick man and a Phiſitian.
                  A Sick man being demaunded of the Phiſitiā how he did, aunſwered: that he ſweete more than needed. Wel (quod the Phiſitian) that is good. The ſecond time being aſked, how he did ſaid: I ſhiuer and quake ſore: that is good (quod ye other.) The third time he demaunded his pacient as before, who aunſwered, that he hadde the dropſy: that is alſo good ſayde the Phiſitian. Thē one of the houhold aſked him how he did: in faith (quod he) through ſo many good thyngs I periſh.
                  
                     MOR. We ought chiefly to abhor them which only ſpeake to delight the eare.
               
            
            
               Fellowſhip of Women.
               
                  139 Of a man and his two wiues.
                  A Certain man of middle age being daintily brought vp, whoſe hair was half black halfe gray, maried two wiues at once in ye ſpring time whereof the one was yong, the other old, which both dwelled togither in one houſe: the elder bicauſe ſhe wold alure him only to loue hir, dayly kemmed his head, & plucked out the black hairs. The yonger likewiſe (bicauſe ſhe would entiſe him to hir, from the olde womans companie)

plucked out his white haires. At length betwéen them, they had plucked off ſo much haire, that he became balde and a common mocking ſtocke.
                  
                     MOR. Nothing is better for olde men, than to leaue the companie of women, eſpecially thoſe that be yong, excepte he wil be cloyed.
               
            
            
               Flying of daunger.
               
                  140 Of a Souldiour.
                  A Certein Souldiour being bidden of his fellowes, to helpe them at a certeine Citie of Italie, whiche fell awaye from the king of Fraunce, aunſwered them: If the right Lorde of the ſoyle ſhall beſiege the Citie, who ſhall bring vs helpe? They ſayde: The king of Fraunce. Then the Souldioure climed vp on a Tombe & cryed thrice with loud voyce, O king of Fraunce, but when no anſwere was giuen him, he turned to them that bad him, ſaying: I wil not come thither, when he that ſhould help me can not heare me requiring ayde. The other whiche wente thither, were beſieged of the Lorde of the towne, which being woon, they were taken and killed.
                  
                     MOR. They are fooles which like Harebrains put them ſelues in daunger.
               
            
            
               Fellowſhip.
               
                  141 Of Trauailers.
                  TWo men iourneid together, wherof the one founde an Axe, the other warned him that he ſhuld not ſaie, I haue found, but we haue

founde. Straight after, as they came togither to thoſe which had loſt it, he which had the Axe, following his fellowe whych iourneyed with him, ſayd: we are vndone, nay (quoth the other) ſaye I am vndone not wée: for when thou foundeſt the Axe, thou didſt ſaye, I haue founde, not wée.
                  
                     MOR. They which were no partners in proſperitie, are no ſure fréendes in miſerie.
               
            
            
               Fighting.
               
                  142 Of the Lyon and a Beare.
                  A Lion and a Beare hauing got a Hindcalfe did fight together for him. When they had long fought and were giddy & wearie, they laye downe to reſt. But the Foxe went aboute them, and ſéeing them layde flat with the Hindcalfe in the midſt, ran betwene them and tooke away the Calfe, they might ſée him, but culd not ariſe, wherefore they ſayde: what fooles are wée to labor for the Foxe?
                  
                     MOR. Fooles laye the pooles, but wiſe men haue the fiſhes.
               
            
            
               Follie.
               
                  143 Of a rich man and his ſeruaunt.
                  A Riche man had a dulhead to his ſeruaunt, whome hee vſed to call the kyng of fooles: He being often offended with his wordes, thought he would be euen with his maiſter, and on a time he turned agayne to him and ſayde: I

wold I were King of fooles, then in al the world there were no greter kingdome than mine, yea and thou alſo ſhouldeſt bée in ſubiection to mee.
                  
                     MOR. All things are full of follie.
               
            
            
               Fooles.
               
                  144 Of a woman that bet hir Husband.
                  A Certen Woman of a manly courage, had ſhrewdly beaten hir huſband, which was a coward and dolte, bicauſe the Kight had ſtollen one of the chikens, which ſhe going forth lefte him to tende: wherefore when his Wife was abſent agayn, he tyed al the chickens to one thréed, and kept them more diligently, leaſt the Kight ſhould ſnatche any of them which he was put in truſt to kéepe: but the Kight comming ſodenly, caughte one in his clawes, whiche as hée woulde haue caried away, he drew vp al the reſt togither into the Aire. This wretched huſbande remembring that for one chicken loſt he was yll handled of his wife, was afrayd of more miſchief to come, and thought it therfore better to die thā to trye hys wiues fury againe. Now this wittie woman had put certen figs into a little pot, wel dreſſed wyth hony and ſwéet ſpices, whereof ſhe warned hir wiſe huſbande, whoſe lickerouſneſſe ſhe feared, that he ſhould not taſt thereof, bicauſe preſent poyſon was in them. Hir huſband willing to die, dyd▪ eate vp al the figs, ſuppoſing that

to be the beſt way to die and to eſcape his wiues anger. When the woman came home & knewe that the Kight had ſnatched away al hir chickēs, ſhe tooke vp a ſtaffe and determined to beate hir huſband, bicauſe he kepte the chickens ſo yll: to whome hir fooliſh huſband ſaid: I praye thée wife beate me not nowe béeing readye to die, for I haue eaten vp all the poyſon in the glaſſe, to puniſhe my ſelfe for my faulte. Then the woman turning hir anger into laughter, forgaue hir huſbande, which for kéeping hir chickens yll, otherwiſe contented hir.
                  
                     MOR Ther is no fit remedie againſt fooles.
               
               
                  145 Of Fishers.
                  SOmtime Fiſhers went a fiſhing: wherwith beeing weary and had caught nothing, they were very ſorie and minded to depart, forthwith a Tuny béeing chaſed by an other greate fiſhe, ſkipped into their boate, whom they tooke and departed merily.
                  
                     MOR. Fortune commonly giueth that, which by cunning can not be got.
               
            
            
               Fortune frowneth on the poore.
               
                  146 Of a rich man and a poore.
                  A Certein man béeing maruellous weary of the greate abundance of hys ryches, offered a begger an .100. crowns if he would go to Fortune (which dwelt in ye furtheſt partes of

the worlde) and beſéeche hir in his name to beſtowe no more goods vppon him. The poore man being agaſt bicauſe of the trauail of ſo long a iourney, refuſed at the firſte, but afterwarde changing his mynde, & promiſing that he would goe, the ryche man ſaide he woulde gyue but .90. The poore man ſuppoſing it to be a ſmall rewarde for ſo great paynes, firſt would not agrée therevnto, but after requiring .90. the riche man could hardly be perſuaded to giue him .80. The begger refuſing that ſumme, and after requiring it, the other rebated alwayes ten from the number which he offred, til it came but to ten pieces. At length ye begger, which refuſed .100. Crowns, being forced by pouertie, tooke the .10. Crownes, and wente vnto Fortune, whome with manye praiers he beſought to giue no more goods to the rich man, but rather that ſhe would be bountiful to him, whiche from his tender age had lyued in continuall pouertie, whom fortune aunſwered: I haue determined to double yea & treble ye riche mans goods which ſente thée, wh
                        •
                     ther he will or not, but thée will I make to lyue continually in pouertie: beſides that, thou ſhouldeſt neuer haue had the .10. Crowns which thou receyuedſt, had I not ben very faſt aſléepe.
                  
                     MOR. Againſte a miſerable perſon Fortune always frowneth, but to a fortunate perſon ſhée

is continually beneficial euen againſt his wil.
               
            
            
               Friendes.
               
                  147 Of a Phiſitian.
                  A Phiſitian hauing the cure of a ſicke man, whoſe chaunce was to die, ſayde to them whiche caried the corps, this man if he had refrayned wine and taken cliſters, had bin aliue at this day: then one of them that were by aunſwered: Sir your aduiſe ſhould haue ben ſhewed when it mighte haue done good, and not nowe when it is to late to call him back.
                  
                     MOR. Friends ſhould helpe in time of néede.
               
               
                  148 Of the Countryman and the Mouſe.
                  THere was a Countryman very poore, but yet ſo merie conceyted, that in his moſte miſerie he forgot not his naturall pleaſauntneſſe. It happened that his ferme houſe by chaunce was ſet on fire, which burned ſo ſore, yt he miſtruſted the quenching, which wyth heauye chéere he beheld. In ye mean time he eſpied a Mouſe running out of the ferme, which made haſt to eſcape burning. The Countriman forgetting his loſſe, ran after the mouſe, & caught him, ſlong him into the midſt of the fire, ſaying: Thou vnthākful beaſt, in tyme of my proſperytie thou dwelledſt wyth me, nowe bicauſe Fortune is chaunged, thou haſt lefte my houſe.
                  
                     
                     MOR. Thoſe are no true fréends which cleaue to thée like a burre in thy felicitie, but in aduerſitie ſwiftly run away.
               
               
                  149 Of the Lion and the Hogge.
                  THe Lion intended to gette him a companion, whervpō many beaſts deſired to be matched with him, yea and inſtantly required it, but hée ſet light by them, & choſe only the Hog into hys fellowſhip, whereof being demaunded the cauſe, anſwered, this beaſt is ſo faithfull that he neuer forſaketh his friends or fellowes in the greateſt daunger that can be.
                  
                     MOR. Wée ſéeke the friendſhip of thoſe men which in time of néed cleaue to vs, and not thoſe which giue vs the ſlippe.
               
            
            
               Friendſhip fayned.
               
                  150 Of the Dog that deuoured the ſhepe.
                  A Certen ſhepherd gaue his Dog charge ouer his ſhéepe to looke to them, for whiche he fed him with the beſt meate. Neuertheleſſe the Dog often killed a ſhéepe & deuoured him, which when the ſhepheard had eſpyed, caught the Dog and wold haue kylled him. Why (quod the dog) wouldeſt thou deſtroy me? I am one of thy houſhold, ſlay the wolfe rather which continually lyeth in waite to deſtroy thy ſheep. Nay (quod the ſhepheard) I thinke thée ratherworthy of death than the Wolfe, for hée is myne open enimie,

but thou vnder the colour of friendſhip, doſt daily decreaſe my flocke.
                  
                     MOR. They are more greuouſly to be puniſhed whiche vnder the pretence of friendſhip do hurt vs, than thoſe whiche ſhewe them ſelues to be our open enimies.
               
            
            
               Gayne.
               
                  151 Of the Larke.
                  A Lark being caught in a net, wept and ſaid: Woe is mée wretch and vnhappy birde, for I haue taken frō no man either gold, ſiluer, or any other thing, but for a grain of corne I die.
                  
                     MOR. This fable is againſt thoſe which for a trifling gayne put them ſelues in daunger.
               
               
                  152 Of a wilde Aſſe.
                  A Wild Aſſe ſeing a tame Aſſe in a fūny place, wēt to him & accoūted him bliſſed, bicauſe he had good féeding & was in good liking: afterward ſeing him beare burthens, & the horſekéeper follow, ſtriking him with a ſtaffe, he ſayd, I thinke thee nowe no more happie, for I ſée that with much ſorrow thou enioyeſt this felicitie.
                  
                     MOR Gaine ful of miſerie and daunger, is not to be followed.
               
            
            
               Giftes.
               
                  153 Of a Countryman and a Counſeller.
                  A Certeine Countryman béeing in lawe vp to the eares, came to a Counſeller, to the ende that by hys helpe he might wynde him ſelfe

oute of the lawe. But his Counſeller béeing otherwiſe occupied, ſente him worde that he had no leyſure to talke with him now, praying him to returne an other time. The Countreyman accounting him for his ſure friende, came often, but could not ſpeake with him. At length he returned againe and broughte with him a yong ſucking Kidde and fatte, with whiche he ſtoode at the Lawyers gate, and often plucked him to make him bleate: the Porter (whom his maiſter commaunded to open the gates to them that brought preſentes) hearing the voyce of the Kid, ſtreight way opened the gate, and had him come in: Then the Countryman turned to the Kyd, & ſayde: I thanke thée my little Kyd, for thou arte the cauſe that I come in ſo lightly.
                  
                     MOR. Nothing is ſo harde but with giftes it is mollifyed.
               
               
                  154 Of Iupiter.
                  WHat tyme that Iupiter made a feaſt at a maryage, all beaſtes brought in their preſents, euery one after his abilitie, among whom the Serpēt was with a roſe in his mouth, which he offered: Iupiter ſéeing him, ſayd aloude, euery mans beneuolence I willingly accept, but thine in no wiſe I will receyue.
                  
                     MOR The wiſe man may well geſſe that the wicked offer nothing without a craftie pretence.
               
            
            
               
               Gluttonie.
               
                  155 Of Flies.
                  FLies flew into a hole ful of hony, wherof they did eate: their féete ſtuck faſt therin, that they could not eſcape, who being nyghe choaked, ſayde: Ah wretches, whiche for a little meat doe peryſhe.
                  
                     MOR. Gluttonye is the cauſe of muche euyll to many.
               
            
            
               Glorying.
               
                  156 Of the Egle and the Rauen.
                  AN Egle came down from an high rock and light one a Lambes back, whiche thing the Rauen ſéeing, deſired to counterfet him in hys dooings, and diſcended vppon a Ram, where bicauſe he ſtuck faſte, he was caught and caſt out to play withall.
                  
                     MOR. Let no man account of himſelfe by an other mans manhoode, but by hys owne power. Cut thy rote after thy cloth.
               
            
            
               God knoweth all.
               
                  157 Of two yong men.
                  TWo yong men came into a Cookes ſhoppe as though they woulde haue bought meate, the Cooke béeing occupied, the one ſtole a péece of meate out of the baſket, and gaue it hys felow to hide vnder his garment: the Cooke perceiuing that a péece of fleſhe was gone, accuſed

them both of theft: then he that tooke it, ſwore by Iupiter, he had it not: the other that had it, ſwore that he tooke it not. Well (quod the Cooke) the théefe I know not, but he that you haue ſworne by, both ſawe and knoweth the théefe.
                  
                     MOR. If we haue ought offended, men know it not ſtraight way, but God that rideth on the heauens & beholdeth the depthes of the ſea, ſeeth al things: if men woulde remember this, they woulde offend leſſe.
               
            
            
               Goodes euill gotten.
               
                  158 Of Mony.
                  SOmtime Money béeing demaūded of vertue, why ſhe rather went to the euil thā the good, aunſwered: bicauſe good men brought vp in thy ſchoole neuer learned to lye and forſwere, & to occupie vſurie, & to rob others, for theſe things are woont to draw me vnto them: forſooth (quod vertue) I had rather that my ſcholers lyued in pouertie, than they ſhould defile thē ſelues with theſe vices, for both of them haue a ſhort ende: ye good leauing euerlaſting glorie vpon earth, flie vp to the kingdome of heauen: but the euill with ſlaunder ynough, leauing their riches, ſhall goe downe to the bottome of Hell.
                  
                     MOR. Gather riches after no yll way, for it will not onely bring in this lyfe an euill report, but alſo after death perpetuall torment.
               
               
                  
                  159 Of a Gote and a Vine.
                  THe Vine ſaide to the Gote, thou hurteſt me by ſhering my leaues: thou knoweſt I am no graſſe, but though thou do me this harme, I wil prouide great plentie of Wyne to ſacrifice thée to the Gods.
                  
                     MOR. Commonly a man helpeth him, to whome he would do ſome miſchiefe.
               
            
            
               Good turnes.
               
                  160 Of the Ant.
                  AN Ant being thirſtie cam to a wel to drink, wherin by miſchaunce he fel, which a Doue a far off eſpying, caſte downe a bough from an high trée, and holpe him: the Ant clymed vp theron, and eſcaped. Immediatly after, a Fouler ſet vp his nets to catche the Doue: then the Ant for to recompence his benefactoure, came ſoftely ſtealing on the Fouler, & bit his foote, whereby the Doue flew away.
                  
                     MOR. We muſt requite a good turn with ye like.
               
            
            
               Great talkers.
               
                  161 Of Miſe that Would hang a bell about a Ca
                        •
                     s neck.
                  THe Miſe aſſembled together & tooke counſel by what policy or cūning they might eſcape ye cats wiles: thē one which in age & experience paſſed the reſt, ſaide: I haue founde a waye whiche ſhall ſaue vs harmeleſſe from ſo great

dangers, if yée will be ruled by mée: let vs hang a Bell about hir necke, by the ſounde whereof, wée ſhall know and perceyue the comming of the Catte: then all with one voyce commended his counſell as good, and ſayde, they muſt ſo doe. Then an other elder than the reſt ſtart vp, commaunding ſilence, and ſayde: I alſo allowe thys opynion, but who will be ſo hardie, that dare hang the Bell about the Catts necke? but when euery one refuſed to doe it, their talke was in vayne.
                  
                     MOR. Many cōmend thoſe things that ought to be don, but few are found to execute the ſame.
               
            
            
               Griefe for ſodaine chaunce.
               
                  162 Of Fiſhers
                  ON a tyme Fiſhers drewe their nets out of the ſea, which they perceiuing to be heauie, reioyced gretly, ſuppoſing they had a great multitude of Fiſhes, but whē they drew the net to land and found a great ſtone but few Fiſhes, they waxed heauie, not for the ſmal number, but bicauſe it fel otherwiſe out than they iudged: thē one of the company being an aūcient man ſaid: let vs not be grieued, for ſorowe waiteth vppon pleaſure, & therfore we ought to be ſory in ſome thing, bicauſe we reioyced ſo much before.
                  
                     MOR. We ought not to be greued, being defeated of our purpoſe.
               
            
            
               
               Hastineſſe.
               
                  163 Of the Wolfe and the Sow.
                  AS a Sow was ready to farrow, the Wolf came vnto hir, promyſing to be ſafegard to hir yong Pigs: ſhe anſwered, of thy ſeruice I haue no néede, but if thou wilt be accounted religious, or ſhew mée any pleaſure, I pray thée depart further from mée, for with thyne abſence thy ſeruice ſhall ſtande mée in better ſtéede than with thy preſence.
                  
                     MOR. All men deſerue no credit in al things: for many promiſe their endeuor not for thy ſake, but for their owne commoditie.
               
               
                  164 Of a Cat.
                  A Certein man had a great Chéeſe in a coffer, which a Mouſe hadde taſted, therefore by the counſel of a friend of his, he ſhut in the Cat ther, which after ſhe had killed the Mouſe, deuoured the whole Chéeſe.
                  
                     MOR. Thoſe ought to be no kepers, whiche can no leſſe hurt vs than our enimies.
               
            
            
               Hastie credit.
               
                  165 Of a Man that would try his Wyues mynde.
                  A Certein crafty man deſirous to vnderſtande his wiues mynd, bicauſe ſhe had often ſayde that ſo derely ſhe loued him yt if ſhée myght wiſh ſhée wold redéeme his life with hir death, he willingly

let fal vpō both their féete a burning ſtick. Then the woman béeing in payne, and forgetting the loue ſhe bare to hir huſbande, did ſhake off the burning ſtick from hir féete onely.
                  
                     MOR. Credite not women when they ſaye they loue their huſbands better than themſelues.
               
               
                  166 Of the Cock and the Capon.
                  A Cock & a Capon dwelled together in a poultry houſe, but the cock was lord of the Hens, and the Capon fed amongſt them: It happened yt a Foxe caught this Cock, and deuoured him, and his comb he touched not, but kept it ſafe & brought it to the Capon, ſaying: O brother capon, thy fellow is dead, wherfore I haue brought thée his combe euen for pure loue which I beare to thée, now if it pleaſe thée to come down, I wil crown thée, that thou mayſt take the regiment of the hens as the cock did: the Capon being ambitious and gréedie of promotion, flew downe from hys rooſt, and came to the Fox, who reioycing therof, caught the Capon incontinent, and killed him.
                  
                     MOR. Take hede howe thou credit al men.
               
               
                  167 Of the Fouler and the Larke.
                  A Fowler ſet his nettes for birdes, whome the Larke a far off eſpying, aſked him what hée did, he aunſwered, that he built a Citie, then he went a good way back, and hid himſelf: the larke

crediting his words came to the net & was takē: to it the Fouler ran, to whom the Larke ſayde: Friend if thou build ſuch a Citie, thou ſhalt find fewe dwellers therin.
                  
                     MOR. Houſes and Cities then chiefly become deſolate, when the Rulers are buſy bodies.
               
            
            
               Haſt maketh wast.
               
                  168 Of Gooſe.
                  THere was a Gooſe which day by day laide a golden Egge: hir maiſter deſirous in al the haſt to be rich, killed the Gooſe, hoping that ther was ſome hidden treaſure within hir: and then finding hir emptie, the wretch was amazed and after mourned and ſighed, that he had loſte both his hope and ſubſtance.
                  
                     MOR. We muſt meaſure our affections and that we be not to haſtie, for haſt maketh waſt, & he that al would haue, ſomtime looſeth all.
               
            
            
               Harlots.
               
                  169 Of a vvoman and hir Louer.
                  A Lewd woman wepte bitterly for hir louer ready to departe from hir, whome ſhe had nere polled of al that he had: whervpon hir neyghbour demaunded the cauſe why ſhe wepte ſo comfortleſſe, forſooth (quod ſhée) his departing doth not greue me, but the cloke which I lefte him to put on.
                  
                     MOR. Harlots loue not their louers, but their Money.
               
            
            
               
               Hatred.
               
                  170 Of a Serpent and a Huſbandman.
                  A Serpent lurking in ye entry of a huſbandmans houſe, ſlue his boy, for whome his parents mourned much, but his father for ſorow tooke an axe, went out and would haue killed the Serpent, ye huſbandman ſéeing him looke vp, made haſt to ſtrike him, but he miſſed him, for he ſtroke the mouth of his hole: whē the ſerpent was gon in and the huſbandman thynking that he had forgot the wrong, he came and ſette bread and ſalte before the hole, but the Serpent ſoftely hiſſing, ſaide: Hereafter neyther truſt or friendſhip ſhal be betwéene vs as long as I ſée a ſtone and thou thy ſonnes graue.
                  
                     MOR. None forgetteth hatred or vengeaunce as long as he ſéeth the cauſe of his gréefe.
               
               
                  171 Of a man and a woman twice maried.
                  A Certein man hauing buried his wife, whiche he loued well, and maried a widowe whiche dayly laide in his diſh the manlyneſſe of hir former huſband: he bicauſe he would be euen with hir, daſht in hir téeth his other wiues honeſt behauiour and chaft lyuing. It hapned on a time, when ſhe was angry, a begger came to the doore and aſked their almes, to whom ſhe gaue a péece of Capon which ſhe for hir owne ſupper and hir huſbands boyled, ſaying: I giue thée this for the

ſoule of my firſt huſband: Hir good man hearing that, called the poore man and gaue him the reſt of the Capō, ſaying: I giue thée this for the ſoule of my wife that is dead: by which means either ſpyting other, at length hadde nothing for their ſupper.
                  
                     MOR. We muſt not fight with thoſe that can reuenge their quarell.
               
            
            
               Helpe in neede.
               
                  172 Of the Countryman and the Horſe.
                  A Coūtrymā draue by the way a ſpare horſe, and an Aſſe ſore laden with packs, the Aſſe béeing weary with trauayling, prayed the Horſe if he would ſaue his life, to eaſe him ſomwhat of his burthen, the Horſe thought ſkorne & denied his helpe: It hapned as they trauayled on in their iourney, the Aſſe being ouerladen, fel vnder his burthen & dyed, then his maiſter layd all the Aſſes burthen and eke the ſkin vpon the horſe, wherewithal his back began to crack: Ah wretch yt I am, ſayd the Horſe, I am thus iuſtly ſerued, bicauſe that lately I refuſed to helpe the poore laboring Aſſe.
                  
                     MOR. Wee muſt helpe our friends that are in miſerie, for parte of our riſing our country claymeth, and part our friendes.
               
            
            
               Heritage.
               
                  173 Of a Pig and his fathers wil.
                  
                     A Pig wept bitterly for ye deth of his parents, but whē he had red his wil and found that a great heap of Acornes & many buſhels of meale were left him, he held his peace: and being aſked why he wept no more, anſwered: ye meale and the Acornes hath ſtopped my mouth.
                  
                     MOR A great heritage cauſeth the heirs quickly to leaue their mourning.
               
            
            
               Hipocriſie.
               
                  174 Of the Cockatrice and Seawolfe.
                  THe Cockatrice on a time went to ye ſea ſide in the clothing of a Monke, & called to him the Wolfe, ſaying: O brother, ſince thou waſt marked with the ſigne of the croſſe, thou art become a perfect Chriſtian, I pray thée therfore come vnto mee, and inſtruct me in the fayth of Chriſt, that I may be baptized, & thereby eſcape euerlaſting iudgement, and haue fruition of eternall ioye. The Wolfe fiſhe marking hym well and knowing what he was, ſayde: O thou hipocrite, a coule maketh not a frier, thy wordes are full of wickedneſſe and craft, neyther intendeſt thou to be baptized of me, but rather thou wouldeſt beguyle & poyſon mée: therefore I will not heare thée, and foorthwith hée ſwam away, & left him all aſhamed.
                  
                     MOR. Beware of thoſe which come in ſhéepes clothing outwardly, but inwardly are rauening Wolues.
               
            
            
               
               Hunger.
               
                  175 Of a Lynnet.
                  A Certayne Linnet was kept vp daintily by a rich man, who much delighted in his ſinging. It happened in time of dearth, that many poore birds came to the Linnet and aſked his almes, but nothing would he giue them, ſaue of the fragments and broken meate that was lefte, which he cared not for, but the birdes reioyſing thereof, eate it vp ſwéetly.
                  
                     MOR. It is an yll dyſh, which a man will refuſe when he is hungry.
               
            
            
               Honor.
               
                  176 Of a Mule.
                  A Mule being fat and pricked with prouēder, cryed aloude and ſayd: My father is a ſwifte running horſe, & I am altogether like him, but once when he ſhould néedes run, and in running ſtayed, he ſtraight way remembred that hée was an Aſſes foale.
                  
                     MOR. Though time bring a man to promotion, yet ought he not to forget his eſtate, for thys lyfe is vnſtable.
               
               
                  177 Of a king and Apes.
                  A Certaine King of Aegipt appoynted Apes to be taught to daunce, whiche as no beaſt is of liker fauoure to a man, ſo none counterfayteth

better or willinglier a mā in his dooings. They hauing learned very quickly the art of daūcing, on a daye appoynted they began to daunce, and were clad in the richeſt purple. Their dauncing delighted the cōpanie a long time, vntil a merye conceited fellow caſt down amongſt them nuts, which he priuily hadde caried in his boſome: the Apes had no ſoner ſéene the nuts, but forgetting the daunce, became as they were afore time, of dauncers, Apes, byting and tearing their clothes in pieces, and fighting together for their nuts, not without great laughter of the beholders.
                  
                     MOR. The giftes of Fortune chaunge not a mans diſpoſition.
               
            
            
               Hope.
               
                  178 Of Oxen.
                  A Heardman entred the ſtable and ſawe the Oxen ſkipping for ioy, he therefore aſked them the cauſe of their ioy, they anſwered: Our hope is to ſpend this day in the good leyſnes Why (quod he) what thing hath brought you to this hope? We dreamed ſaid they, it ſhould be ſo: Ah (quod hée) giue no credit to ſuch dreames, which you are like to find vntrue, for I dreamed that yée ſhould plough to day, and mens dreams are wont to be truer than beaſtes.
                  
                     MOR. Nothing is ſo ſoone begyled, as the hope of men.
               
               
                  
                  179 Of a Hogge.
                  A Hogge was blamed of a ſhéepe that he yelded no profit to his maſter, of whom he was ſo digently fed: ſéeing they gaue him milk, wooll, and lambes. He anſwered: when I am dead my fruit commeth in, for he feedeth me for a purpoſe.
                  
                     MOR None wil take paines without hope of reward.
               
               
                  180 Of a man which hid a treaſure.
                  A Certein rich man hid a treaſure in the wood, whereof none knewe but hys Godfather, whō he greatly truſted. But when he came with in fewe dayes after to ſée it: he found that it was digged vp and caried away: he therfore iudged (as it was in déede) that his Godfather had takē it away: he went & ſpake with him, ſaying: Godfather, I will alſo hide a 1000. crownes more wher my treaſure is. Hée being deſirous to gain more, brought againe the treaſure and layde it where it was, when the true owner came ſhortly after thither and founde it, he tooke it home with him and went to his Godfather and ſaide: Thou promiſſe breaker, beſtowe no more labor in vaine to go to the treaſure, for thou ſhalt find it no more.
                  
                     MOR. It is an eaſie thing to deceyue a couetous man with hope of more money.
               
            
            
               
               Humilitie
               
                  181 Of the Pigarde and the Egle
                  THe Pigarde ſometime being purſued by a Hauke, flyed to the Egle for ſauegard, ſaying: Thou art great and mercifull, therfore came I to thée for ayde and ſuccoure, whiche am ſmall & weake, crauing that I may be vnder the ſhadow of thy winges, to defend me from the furie of my enimie. The Egle moued with pittie & compaſſion, ſayd: Bicauſe of thy lowlineſſe and imbecillicie abyde with mée, and feare nothing as long as thou art in my companie.
                  
                     MOR. They that are mightie, ought to defend the méeke and lowly.
               
            
            
               Heart.
               
                  182 Of a man ſtoned.
                  A Certaine man béeing ſtoned to death of the people, roſe againe: who being aſked of one what did moſt gréeue him in that ſtoning, ſaid: Nothing ſo much as the ſtone which one did throw whō I ſuppoſed to be my friend, although it touched me not.
                  
                     MOR. The hurte done by our friendes doth more greue, than that which our enimies doe.
               
            
            
               Hurtfull gaine.
               
                  183 Of a Rauen and a Serpent.
                  A Rauen lacking meate, ſée a Serpent ſléeping on a ſunnie banke, at whom he flewe downe

and caught him vp: who turned againe and byt him: the Rauen therwith nigh deade ſayde: Ah wretch that I am, which haue founde ſuch gayne whereof I peryſhe.
                  
                     MOR. This fable is againſt him, which by finding a treſure, hath put him in daūger of his life.
               
            
            
               Hurtfull things.
               
                  184 Of a poore man.
                  A Certain poore man had nothing but a houſe vnderſet with ſhores, which was like to fal. It happened on a time as he returned from the fieldes, he founde it fallen, and bicauſe he had not wherwith to ſet it vp again, he was ſo much troubled in his mynd, that he fell to mourning & wéeping out of meaſure. But as this poore man thus made moane, he eſpied a braſen pot, which many years had ben hiddē in ye wal, lying amōg the ſtones and rubbiſh, which when he had takē vp and opened, he found it ful of gold, wherwith his hart hopping for ioy, he left off his wéeping.
                  
                     MOR. Sometime that we thinke hurtful, turneth to our great profite and commoditie.
               
            
            
               Jeſting.
               
                  185 Of a learned man not eſteemed.
                  A Certaine learned man béeing bidden to the feaſte of a Prince, and commaunded to ſitte

down in the nethermoſt roomes, when the other gueſtes had great fiſhes ſette before them, but to him very ſmall ones, he didde eate none, but put them one after an other to his mouth, then to hys ears, as though he would demaund ſomthing of them, and after layd them downe whole and vntouched in the diſhes again: whom the maiſter of the feaſt aſked why he did ſo? he aunſwered, two yeare agoe in theſe parties my father through ſhipwracke was caſt away, and what became of his body I coulde not afterwardrs knowe, I dyd therfore demaūd of theſe little fiſhes if they cold tel any tydings of him, but they aunſwered that time they were not bred: wherfore I muſt aſke the greater fiſhes. The Prince hearing ſo merie a ſaying, commaunded of the greater fiſhes to be ſet before him, & euer after he placed him among his chiefeſt gueſtes.
                  
                     MOR. Amongſt vnlearned men, learning is not ſo profitable as to the learned is pleaſaunt and mery talke.
               
            
            
               Ignorance.
               
                  186 Of a Phiſitian.
                  AN olde Woman being troubled with pain of hir eyes, bargained with a Phiſitian for a certaine ſum of money to pay him if he healed hir: if not, he ſhould haue nothing. The phiſitian went about his cure, who dayly came and anoynted

hir eyes, but ſhe (that houre he dreſſed hir) could ſée nothing, then he at his departure, caried ſome thing out of the houſe. The olde woman ſée hir ſtuff dayly decreaſe, ſo that when ſhe was healed, ſcarſe any thing was left, to whome when the Phiſitian came and required his bargain, bicauſe ſhe could ſée clearely, and thereof brought witneſſes, ſhe ſaide: Truely I rather ſée leſſe than before, for when I was blind I coulde ſée much ſtuf in my houſe, but now that I can ſée as thou ſaiſt, I perceue nothing of yt which I had.
                  
                     MOR. Wicked perſons not knowing what they doe, ſpeake often againſt them ſelues.
               
               
                  187 Of a Dog.
                  A Certein man had two Dogs, wherof the one he taught to hunt, ye other to kéepe hys houſe, if it chaunced the hounde to catche any thing, hée which kept within was partaker thereof, the other being offended, caſt oft in his felowes téeth that he dayly tooke paynes, and the other did nothing, and yet he was fed with his trauaile: his fellowe aunſwered and ſaide: Blame not mée but my Maiſter, which neuer taught me to labor but to eate that an other hath ſwet for.
                  
                     MOR. Yong men which knowe nothing, are not to be blamed, ſéeing their Parentes brought them vp ſo.
               
            
            
               
               Immoderateneſſe.
               
                  188 Of Sheepe waſting Corne.
                  A Huſbandman complayned that the ſhéepe deſtroied al his Corne, whervppon Iupiter commaunded the ſhéep to féed temperately, and bicauſe they obeyed not his will, the Wolfe was appoynted to afflicte them moderately. But when the ſhepherd complayned that al hys flock was killed by the Wolf, Iupiter was offended, & bad the Hunter kyll the Wolfe, which thing hee quickly dyd.
                  
                     MOR. No immoderate thing is continuall.
               
            
            
               Impoſſible promiſes.
               
                  189 Of the Owle and the Larke.
                  THe Larke came to the Owle and ſayde: Deare ſiſter, I praye thée beare me cōpanie to morowe at noone, for my louer deſireth to ſée me by Sunne light: Nowe if I be matched with thée, I ſhal ſeem more beutiful. The Owle promiſed to be ther, for he was aſhamed to ſtick with hir for ſo ſmal a trifle. When day was vp & the Sun did ſhine very cleare, the Larke wayted for him, but the Owle durſt not appeare by Sun light, bicauſe ſhe could not ſée, and therfore came not, wherwith the larke being offended, alwayes after abhorred & purſued hir: wherefore the Owle flieth not by day for feare of the lark, but ſéeketh his meate by nyght.
                  
                     MOR. None ought to promiſe that which he

can not perfourme.
               
               
                  190 Of the Reede.
                  THe Réede was diſpleaſed yt not onely al other trees, but ſometime graſſe did beare a neſt, and he only of that honor was depriued: he therfore prayed a litle bird to build hir neſt vpō him, ſo would I (quod ſhe) but I miſtruſt thy inconſtancie, for I wil not build my childrens houſe vpon ſo tickliſh a foundation.
                  
                     MOR. We oughte not to commit our ſelues or our children to inconſtant perſons.
               
               
                  191 Of the Eele.
                  THe Eele ſaide to the Serpent, why do men purſue mée rather than thée, ſéeing we are ſo néere kin and ſo like? Mary (quod he) If they hunt mée, they ſeldome eſcape ſcotfrée.
                  
                     MOR They are leaſt hurte, whiche vſe to reuenge their iniuries.
               
            
            
               Innocencie.
               
                  192 Of the Crowe and the Sheepe.
                  A Crowe lighted on a ſhéepes backe & made a great noyſe, then ſaid the ſhéep: If yu ſhuldeſt do ſo to a dog, thou mighteſt chaunce catche copper. Yea (ſaid the Crow) I know with whom I deale, for I am to the pacient gréeuous, and to the angry pleaſaunt.
                  
                     MOR The wicked ſtriue continually with the féeble and ſimple folke: the innocent is troden

vnder foote, but no man gaineſayeth the vngodly, if he be ſtout.
               
            
            
               Inough hath none.
               
                  193 Of the Ape and the Foxe.
                  THe Ape prayed the Fox to giue him a piece of his taile to couer his buttockes withall, bicauſe that to him was a burthen, woulde ſtande him in good ſtéede and do him much worſhip. The Foxe aunſwered and ſaid, that ſhe had nothing too muche, and ſhe had rather ſwéep the ground therewith, than it ſhould couer the Apes buttockes.
                  
                     MOR. Some haue great ſcarcitie, and ſome haue great plentie, yet fewe rich men are ſo wel bent as to helpe the poore with any thing of their exceſſe and ſuperfluitie.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋaine ioye.
               
                  194 Of the Frogs and the Sunne.
                  THe Frogges reioyſed at the mariage of the Sun, to whom one ſayd: O wretched kind, if we onely feare the Sunne beames, who will abyde hym if he gette children?
                  
                     MOR. This fable is agaynſt thoſe, which ignorauntly reioyce at their owne harme.
               
               
                  195 Of a Wolfe fallen into a pit.
                  A Fox eſpying a Wolfe fallen into a hole, dyd laugh, & reioyſing ſkipped about the brinkes of the Pit, calling him fooliſh beaſt, which would

not beware of mens deceits. As he thus wantō
                     ly ſcoffed, the earth fayled, and caried him heade, long in alſo: whome the Wolfe ſéeing to fall ſaide: I ſhall nowe carye a great comfort of my death to hell, bicauſe I ſee the Foxe (which mocked me) periſhe with mee.
                  
                     MOR. We ought not reioyce at anothers miſerie, ſeing we may fal into the ſame likewiſe.
               
               
                  196 Of two Hogs.
                  A Certain man had two Hogges which bare ſo mortal hatred one toward an other, that daily they tore eche other with their téeth: but whē their Maiſter killed one of them, the other was wonderful glad, ſeeing his enimie ſhould dye incontinent: within fewe dayes after, when hée him ſelfe was drawen to deathe, he tormented him ſelfe, ſaying: Woe is me wretch, why did I ſo reioyce ouer my enimies death, whom ſo ſoone I followe to the ſame ende?
                  
                     MOR. None ought to reioyce, no not ouer the death of his enimie, ſeeing it is euident that all muſt dye.
               
            
            
               Judging outwardly.
               
                  197 Of a Wolfe that put on a Sheepes skin.
                  A Wolfe put on a Shéeps ſkin, and was conuerſant amongſt the Sheepe, of whome hée dayly deuoured one, which thing when the ſhepherd had eſpied, he hanged him vp in an high

trée, thē other ſhepherds aſked him why he hoong vp a Shéepe: Ah (quod he) the ſkin as ye ſée is a ſhéepe, but in his déedes he was a Wolfe.
                  
                     MOR. Men muſte not be eſteemed after their apparell, but after their works, for many are vnder ſhéepes ſkinnes rauening wolues.
               
               
                  198 Of the Elephant.
                  AS the Lyon paſſed by the wilde beaſts thorough the deſert, they made their obeiſaunce to him as King of beaſts, onely the Elephant bowed not his knée, bicauſe he coulde not: but ſome beaſtes enuying him, reported yll of him to the Lion, he ſent for him foorthwith, and ſayd: Why art thou ſo ſtubborne, that thou doeſt not thy dutie as the reſt? My Lord, according to my power I honoure thée, but I can not kneele bycauſe I lack knées. The Lion ſayde, if thou doo it in thy heart, it ſuffiſeth: wherefore he condemned hys accuſers, and promoted the Elephant.
                  
                     MOR. Wée ought to giue no iudgemente, before the truth be tryed.
               
            
            
               Labor.
               
                  199 Of an Aſſe.
                  THe Aſſe in the winter ſeaſon was muche troubled for the extreme colde that he ſuffered, and that he lyued onely by ſtraw, whervpon he wiſhed for the ſpring tide, that he might

féede of the ſwéete graſſe. When the ſpring w
                        •
                      come, his maſter béeing a potter, compelled hy
                        •
                      to carry clay into the workhouſe, and wood to t
                        ••
                      furnace, and thence to carry bricke & tile into d
                        •
                     
                     uers places: wherwith béeing anoyed, he long
                        ••
                      for ſommer, hoping then to take his eaſe whe
                        •
                      his maiſter was buſie in his harueſt: but then h
                        •
                      caried wheate into the barne, and from then
                        ••
                      home, and had no reſt: wherfore he thoughte 
                        〈◊〉
                      Autumne were once come, to haue an end of hi
                        •
                      trauell: but he could not yet be eaſed of his trauell, but as then caried wine, fruit and wood: the
                        •
                      he deſired for froſt and ſnow agayne, that at th
                        •
                      laſt he might haue ſome eaſe of his trauell.
                  
                     MOR. In this lyfe there is no tyme voyde of continuall labour.
               
            
            
               Learning.
               
                  200 Of a Husbandman and a Poet.
                  A Certayne Huſbandman came to a Poet, whoſe grounds he tylled, whom bycauſe he found alone ſitting amongſt his Bookes, aſked hym by what meanes he coulde lyue ſo ſolytarie? Mary (quod he) I was not alone afore thou cameſt héere.
                  
                     MOR. Learned men which dayly are in company of ſuche as they are, be neuer alone, but when they are amongſt the vnlearned.
               
               
                  
                  201 Of a Riche man vnlearned, and a Poore man learned.
                  A Certaine man being riche but vnlearned, mocked a learned man which was poore, by
                     
                        •
                     auſe that he himſelfe with his own trauaile had 
                        •
                     athered much goods, but he which was ſo lerned 
                        •
                     as in great penurie: No maruaile (quod hée) 
                        •
                     icauſe thou haſt ſtudied to gather riches, but I 
                        •
                     aue endeuored to get learning, whiche doth far 
                        •
                     xcel ryches. Herevpon fel a contention between 
                        •
                     he riche man and the learned, whither learning or ryches were more excellent, which coulde not 
                        •
                     e ended ſeeing both had many fauorers, but the ryth man had moſt: At length by this meanes it was knowne that learning excelled ryches, thorough ciuile diſcorde béeing bothe compelled to liue in baniſhmēt, when they could cary nothing away with them of their ſubſtance they, went away into an other citie, where the learned man was hyred to teach for a great ſtipende, and had in honour and eſtimation: but he which was rich through pouertie béeing fayne to beg his breade from doore to doore, confeſſed that in his opinion he had erred.
                  
                     MOR. The giftes of Fortune, bicauſe they paſſe to and fro, are farre ſubiect to the giftes of the mynde, whiche are proper and euerlaſting.
               
            
            
               
               Learne by others.
               
                  202 Of the Pike and the Tench.
                  AS a certain Fiſher angled, he ſo bayted h
                        ••
                      hookes that the Fiſhes coulde not percei
                        ••
                      them, which the Pyke and the Tenche ſé
                        •
                     
                     ing, were very deſirous of it: but the Pyke b
                        •
                     
                     ing ſubtil ſaid to the Tench: This bayte ſéemet
                        •
                      to be good and delicate, yet I thinke it is layde t
                        •
                      deceyue fiſhes withall, therefore let vs forſake 
                        〈◊〉
                      leaſt we peryſhe through the luſtes of gluttonie In faythe (quod the Tenche) it were a folly t
                        •
                      leaue ſo good a morſel for feare of nothing: I wi
                        •
                      fyrſt trye it and make merry with it, and look
                        •
                      thou what wil hap. As he ſwallowed the bayte
                        •
                      he felte the deceite of the hooke and would fayn
                        •
                      haue retired, but the Fiſher firſt plucked him vp then the Pyke ſwam away & ſaid: Let vs learn
                        •
                      by our fellowes miſchance, leaſt we peryſhe.
                  
                     MOR. Happie is hée, whome other mens harmes do make to beware.
               
            
            
               Leudeneſſe of women.
               
                  203 Of a Ielous man.
                  A Certayn Ielous man maryed a Wife, whō he knew vnhoneſt, wherevpon he deliuered hir to a truſtie friend of his to kéepe, promiſing him a great rewarde, if he kept hir ſo ſafely, that by no meanes the bonde of wedlocke were broken▪ When he had tried hir a fewe days and

                     
                        •
                     erceiued that ſhe might hardly be kepte ſafe, by
                     
                        ••
                     uſe through hir ſubteltie he was nighe ouer
                     
                        •
                     ome, went to hir huſbande and told him that he 
                        ••
                     oulde not take ſo great charge vpon him, ſéeing 
                        ••
                     at Argus himſelf, with an hundred eyes, were 
                        •
                     ot able to kéepe hir by conſtraint: he ſaid more
                     
                        •
                     uer, if he might be put to choyſe, he had rather 
                        •
                     y the ſpace of one whole yere, dayly carry into 
                        •
                     he fieldes a ſacke full of fleas, and turne them 
                        •
                     ll to graſſe, and bring them home agayne at e
                     
                        •
                     ening, than one day too haue the charge of a 
                        •
                     eude woman.
                  
                     MOR. No kéeper be he neuer ſo diligent, can 
                        •
                     éepe ſafely a wanton minion.
               
            
            
               Liberalitie.
               
                  204 Of a Liberall man.
                  A Frank and Liberall man towarde all men, trauelling farre, fell amongſt théeues, who 
                        •
                     tanding about him, and ready to ſtay him, one of 
                        •
                     hem cryed out: kyll not thys man which hathe muche holpen me, for ſometime he did not onely 
                        •
                     eceyue me gently into his houſe, but alſo nori
                     
                        •
                     hed me béeing ſicke, and cauſed a Phiſitian too 
                        •
                     ooke vnto me, with which wordes his felowes 
                        •
                     elenting, ſuffered him to depart vnhurt.
                  
                     MOR. As farre as we may, we ſhould doo good to all men.
               
            
            
               
               Libertie.
               
                  205 Of the Dog and the Lyon.
                  A Dog by chaunce met with a Lyon, to whom he ſayd merily, what wandreſt thou (O miſer) through woods and deſerts nighe pyned for hunger? Marke howe fatte and trim I am: I neuer take paynes for it, but get it idelly. Truth it is (ſayde the Lyon) that thou fareſt well, yet thou (O foole) art in bondage, ſerue thou whiche canſt ſerue, for I am frée and will not ſerue.
                  
                     MOR. In euery thing libertie far excelleth.
               
            
            
               Lyers.
               
                  206 Of the Shepheard and the Huſbande men.
                  A Boy kepte ſhéepe in a great Paſture, who thrée or foure tymes dyd crye in ieſte that the Wolfe was come: which thing cauſed the Huſbandmen (out of euery quarter of the Countreis) to aſſemble there. It chaunced verily, that the Wolfe came at lengthe, and the Boy called for help as before, but they béeing oft deluded, would not once ſtirre out of their doores, whereby the ſhéepe were all deſtroyed.
                  
                     MOR. He that vſeth lying, though he chaunce once to tell a truth, ſhall not ſoone be credited.
               
               
                  207 Of Mercurius.
                  
                     IVpiter commaunded Mercurius to beſtowe amongeſt craftes men the medicine to make

them ly, which when he had wel ſtamped & meaſured, he poured it equally vpon euery one The ſhoomaker only remained, on whō (bicauſe much of the medicine was lefte) he poured all in the morter: whereof it came to paſſe, that all craftes men are liers, but moſt of all ſhoomakers.
                  
                     MOR. This fable is againſt lying workmen.
               
            
            
               Like to like.
               
                  208 Of an olde man and his Sonne.
                  A Certaine olde man being thruſt out of doors by his Sonne, lyued in an Hoſpitall. On a time he eſpied his Sonne trauayling that way, whom he prayed, that at the leaſt he would ſend him two towels of al his lynnen, for which he had ſwet ful ſore▪ who being at length moued with his Fathers prayers, commaunded a little Boye his ſonne, to fetch his Grandfather the linnen that he required. The Boy being witty and worthy of ſuche a father, brought but one, whome his Father rebuked bicauſe he brought not two as he was bidden: forſoothe (quod he) I keepe the other for thée, that when thou art olde and liueſt in an Hoſpitall, I myght ſende it to thee.
                  
                     MOR. Looke what loue we beare towardes our Parentes, the ſame will our children beare toward vs.
               
            
            
               
               Lyue in thy vocation.
               
                  209 Of a Camell.
                  A Camell being wery of his eſtate, complayned that the Buls had goodly hornes, but he himſelf had no defence to reſiſt other beaſts He therfore beſought Iupiter to giue him horns alſo: Who laughed at his fooliſh requeſt, wherof not only he was denied, but alſo had his eares cropped.
                  
                     MOR. Lette euery man be contente with his calling, for as ſome hunte after better Fortune, they happen to worſe.
               
               
                  210 Of the Aſſe, the Ape, and the Mole.
                  THe Aſſe complayned that he lacked hornes, and the Ape that he wanted a tayle. Peace fooles (quod the Mole) for I am blinde alſo.
                  
                     MOR. Some are not content with their eſtate, but if they wayed wel other mens miſfortunes, they would quietlier endure their owne.
               
            
            
               Loue of money.
               
                  211 Of a ryche man.
                  A Ryche man had two daughters, wherof the one died, at whoſe buriall he hyred women to lament: the other ſayde: What wretches are wée, for to vs this mourning belongeth, but wée can not ſkyll thereof, and they whiche haue nothing to doo therewith, how pitifully doe they wayle? To whom hir mother ſaide: Maruell

not daughter if they lament ſo, for they doe it bicauſe of money.
                  
                     MOR. Some men for loue of money, feare not to picke aduantage from an others miſerie.
               
            
            
               Madneſſe.
               
                  212 Of a mad man.
                  A Certaine mad Man wandring throughe Cities, cried aloud that he had wiſdome to ſell, then one offered money and required it, to whome he lent a blowe & gaue him a long thréed, ſaying: Thou ſhalt be wiſe if thou kéepe thée as farre from mad men, as this is long.
                  
                     MOR. We muſt haue nothing to do with mad men.
               
            
            
               Mad ſeruaunts.
               
                  213 Of a Prieſt and his Boy.
                  A Prieſt giuen to belly good chéere, deliuered to his Boy ten fat thruſhes vppon a Spit to be roſted, ſaying that he ſhould eate them al at a bit, if he let them fall into the aſhes. Within a ſhort while after, whē he returned (for he was gone out to doo certeine buſineſſe) he founde the boye crying, who being demaunded whye he wept, aunſwered, bicauſe he could eate but nine when they fell into the aſhes, requeſting that he might not be forced to eate the tenthe, bicauſe he was ful ſwolne more than inough. The prieſt being offended, as well with the madneſſe of the

boy, as bicauſe he ſaw that he had loſt his ſupper, led the boy without the threſhold of the dore, and ſhewed him thrée wayes, ſaying: Chooſe which of theſe thou wilt, for héere thou ſhalt not lodge this night.
                  
                     MOR. We ought not to kéepe mad ſeruaunts in our houſe.
               
            
            
               Mariage.
               
                  214 Of a yong man.
                  A Certeine yong man which ſhould marrie a wife, being demaunded whither he woulde haue hir, tourned to his frends and neibours preſent, ſaying: Why ſtand ye like dumbe men, why do ye not pray God to help me this day? for if we pray God to help them which néeze, where no danger is, how much more ought ye nowe to pray for me to whom ſo great danger is at hand?
                  
                     MOR. They which marrie enter into greate danger.
               
            
            
               Meane life.
               
                  215 Of Iupiter.
                  
                     IVpiter celebrating a marriage, receiued al beaſtes vnto the feaſt, only the Snaile made ſlowe haſte, the cauſe wherof he maruelling at, aſked him why he came not to ye feaſt? he anſwered: My houſe is deare to me and excellent: wherat Iupiter being angry, gaue ſentence that he ſhuld cary his houſe about him.
                  
                     
                     MOR. Some men had rather liue hardly at home, than daintily abroade.
               
            
            
               Myght.
               
                  216 Of the Wolfe and the Lambe.
                  AS a Wolfe was drinking at the heade of a ſpryng, he eſpied a Lambe far beneath alſo drynking of the ſame ſpryng, wherat grudging ran haſtily to the Lamb & roughly rebuked him for troubling ye ſpring. The Lamb trēbling beſought him to ſhewe compaſſiō on him, being therof giltleſſe, alleaging that bicauſe he dranke far beneath him, by no meanes he could trouble his drinking, neyther yet meant it. The Wolfe hauing determined euen at the firſte ſighte, the deathe of the Lambe, threatned hym moſt rigorouſly, ſaying: Thy labor is in vaine to aſke pardon, for thou art alwayes my enimie, thy father, thy mother, and all thy curſed kinred are willingly my foes: but this daye I will be reuenged of thee.
                  
                     MOR. The mightie if he be deſpoſed to hurte, eaſely findeth occaſion thereto. A ſmall is a great faulte, if a man deale with his Superiours.
               
            
            
               Muſick.
               
                  217 Of a Swanne.
                  A Ryche man brought vp a Swan and a Gooſe together, but not both to one purpoſe, for the one ſhoulde ſerue to ſing, the other for the table.

When the time was come that the Gooſe ſhould do that for which he was kept vp, it chaunced to be night, ſo that one could not be knowen from the other, and the Swanne was caried awaye inſtead of the Gooſe, who ſoong a ſong at the beginning of hir deth, by which ſhe ſhewed hir nature, and by hir ſwéete ſinging eſcaped death.
                  
                     MOR. Commonly Muſick prolongeth life.
               
            
            
               Neceſſitie.
               
                  218 Of a Horſeman and a Husbandman.
                  A Horſeman required a Huſbandmā to catch a Hare, whiche he tooke in his handes and aſked the price, and foorthwith ſet ſpurs to his horſſe: but the Huſbandman ſayde: Make no haſt, for I will giue it thée for a preſent.
                  
                     MOR This fable toucheth thoſe which refuſe their owne vpon neceſſitie.
               
            
            
               Negligence of ſeruants.
               
                  219 Of a Man and his Dog.
                  A Certaine man hauing forgotte to ſhut the doore wher the Hens rooſted: when he aroſe in the morning, founde that they were all kylled and caried awaye by the Foxe: He was wroth therefore with the Dog, bycauſe he hadde not well tended hys goods, & bet him ſore. Why, (quod he) if thou haſt ben negligent in ſhutting the doore, for whome the Hens layde Egges, and hatched Chickens, is it any maruell if I béeing

in a dead ſléepe, and haue no profite by them, did not perceiue the Foxe comming?
                  
                     MOR. We muſte neuer hope to haue diligent ſeruants, where the maiſter is negligent.
               
            
            
               Newe things best.
               
                  220 Of a Souldiour and his Horſe.
                  THere was a Souldiour which had a paſſing fine horſe, and boughte an other in goodneſſe nothing like vnto him, whome more nicely he kept than the firſt: Then ſaid he to his fellow, why dothe my Maiſter kéepe me paſſingly aboue thée, ſéeing I am not to be compared to thée, neyther in comelyneſſe, ſtrength, nor ſwiftneſſe? He anſwered him: This is the courſe of the worlde, that new gueſtes are beſt welcome.
                  
                     MOR. Such is the madneſſe of men, that they preferre newe things afore olde, thoughe they be worſer.
               
            
            
               Obedience.
               
                  221 Of the Kid and the Wolfe.
                  A Gote going abrode to féede, ſhut vp hir yong Kid at home, charging him not to open the doore till hir returne: The Wolf by chaunce hearing that, after hir departure knocked at the doore, faining the voice of the Gote, and bad him open it. The Kid perceiuing his pretence, denyed to open the doore, ſaying: Thoughe thy voyce be like a Gotes, yet I ſée a wolf through the chinks.
                  
                     
                     MOR. It is good for children to obey their Parents, yong men to be ruled by age.
               
            
            
               Offences vnpuniſhed.
               
                  222 Of a Philoſopher.
                  A Philoſopher of the ſecte of Cynicus in chiding béeing ſtricken, was not onely therewith contented, but alſo rewarded hym that ſtrake, with a piece of ſiluer: Which thing when al that were preſent maruelled at, and ſaid yt he was worthy to be beaten ageyne, ah (quod hée) yée knowe not what I haue done nowe, but hereafter yée ſhall know: not long after as that ſtryker woulde haue beaten an other (for he hoped to gayne ſomwhat,) he receyued his deathes wound, and feeling death to come vppon him, he ſayd▪ how much better had it ben for mée to haue ben ſtriken again of the Philoſopher, than to be rewarded with a ſiluer peny?
                  
                     MOR. When offenders eſcape ſcot frée, it doth them ſomtime more hurte than puniſhment.
               
            
            
               Ouer haſtineſſe.
               
                  223 Of the Mouſe and the Cat.
                  A Flocke of Myſe had their abiding in a hollow wal, where out by chaūce péeping, they eſpyed a Cat, which ſat in a chaumber looking grimly, and hanging downe hir heade. Then ſaide one of them: This beaſte ſéemeth very gentle and ſimple, for hir countenaunce

pretendeth holineſſe, I will therefore go ſpeake with hir, and contract a perfect league of friendeſhip with hir that ſhall neuer be broken. When he had ſo ſayde, he came néerer vnto hir, whome the Cat caught & tore in pieces: the other ſéeing that, ſayde: Verily, verily, wée muſt not credit ſmooth lookes.
                  
                     MOR. We muſt not iudge any man by hys countenaunce, but by his good woorkes: for in a ſheeps ſkyn oft are wrapped rauening Wolues.
               
            
            
               Pacience for gayne.
               
                  224 Of the Sowe and the Dog.
                  A Sowe mocked a Spaniell, bicauſe he vſed to faune on his maiſter, which ſo oft had beaten him, and plucked him by the eares, to teache him to hunt. Thou mad body (quod the Dogge) thou knowſt not what I haue gained by theſe ſtripes, for hereby doe I eate the ſwéete Partriches and Quayles.
                  
                     MOR. We muſt not be gréeued if our Maiſter beate vs, for therof iſſueth plentiful goodneſſe.
               
            
            
               Pacience perforce.
               
                  225 Of a Lambe and a Wolfe.
                  A Lamb ſtanding in an highe place, rayled on the Wolfe as he paſſed by beneath, calling him naughty beaſt and rauening, to whom the Wolfe turning ſayde: Thou doeſt not taunt me, but the Toure wheron thou ſtandeſt.
                  
                     
                     MOR. Some ſuffer wrong of vile perſons, for feare of greater men.
               
               
                  226 Of a Flie.
                  A Flie by chaunce fell into a fleſhe pot, wherin being nigh choked, ſayd to himſelfe, beholde I haue eate and dronk ſo much, and ſo wel waſhed me, that now being ſo full, I am content to die.
                  
                     MOR. A wiſe man will ſtoutly beare out that which by no meanes can be auoided.
               
            
            
               Parentes.
               
                  227 Of the Ape and his two ſonnes.
                  THe reporte is, that if the Ape chance to haue a twin, ſhée loueth the one, and hateth the other: It came to paſſe, that ſhée had two at a clap, who by chaunce being put in feare, bicauſe ſhée wold eſcape the preſent danger, caried yt ſhée loued in hir armes, which as ſhée ran hedlōg, ſhée daſhed againſt a rock, and flue it, the other which ſhée hated, ſat on hir rough back, & went ſcot frée.
                  
                     MOR It chaunceth commonly that parentes bring that childe to naughte, whome they make wanton, and whome leſſe they cocker, to proue a valiant and good man.
               
            
            
               Pleaſe euery body.
               
                  228 Of an olde man which caried an Aſſe
                  IT was talked ſometime amongſte the Popes Secretaries, that thoſe menne which framed their lyfe after the opinion of the common people,

were in a miſerable bondage, bicauſe it was impoſſible to pleaſe euery one, ſéeing they are of ſundry iudgements. To which opinion one tolde, that there was an olde man which went to markette, with his ſonne to ſell an Aſſe, whiche he draue vnladen before him. As he paſſed on his way, there were men labouring by in the fields, which blamed the olde man, bicauſe that neyther he nor his ſonne did ride on the Aſſe which went emptie, ſéeing the one for his age, the other for his infancie had néede to be caryed. Then the old man ſette his ſonne on the Aſſe, and himſelfe went by on foote, which thing other ſéeing, ſayde that he doted for letting his ſonne ryde whiche was ſtronger, and he being olde woulde followe on foote: forthwith he chaunged his minde, and ſette off his ſonne, and ridde him ſelfe. When he hadde ridden a little further, other mette hym, who blamed him, that he hadde no regarde to the age of his little ſonne, but would let him followe him as a drudge, and him ſelfe being his Father, did ride on the Aſſe: wherwith he being moued, ſette his ſonne alſo on the Aſſe. Not long after he was aſked by other, whoſe the Aſſe was: Mary (quod hée) it is mine: then they rebuked hym that he had no pitie on his poore Aſſe, but to ſette two on him, ſéeing one was ſufficient. Then the man being troubled with ſo ſundry opinions,

and ſéeing he coulde not be in quiet, but ſtill wa
                        •
                      checked, he bounde the Aſſes foure feete togithe
                        •
                      and on a ſtaffe caried him on his owne ſhoulder and his ſonnes to markette: whereat all m
                        •
                     nn wondring, laughed excéedingly, blaming both their follies, eſpecially the fathers. The old ma
                        •
                      therewith chared, went to the riuers 
                        •
                     ide, an
                        •
                      caſte his Aſſe bounde into the water, and ſo ſoft
                        •
                      him and returned home: by which meanes th
                        •
                      ſilly olde man deſirous to content euery bodye could pleaſe none, but loſt his Aſſe.
               
            
            
               Pleaſure.
               
                  229 Of a Firre tree and the Buſhe.
                  THe reporte was ſometime, that the Firre trée deſpiſed the Buſhes, and boaſted of his owne tal ſtature, that he was placed in houſes, and to beare a ſaile in the Shippes: but they low, vile, and good for nothing: then they framed him this anſwere: thou boaſteſt much (O Firre trée) of thy goodneſſe, and ſcorneſt oure euils, beſides this thou concealeſt thy miſchéefe, and paſſeſt ouer our good fortune, but when thou ſhalt be cut downe with the axe, howe gladly woldeſt thou be like vnto vs which are voide of care?
                  
                     MOR. Felicitie hath euils to accompany hir, as miſery hath good things. In ſumme, this is ſafe &

                     
                        •
                     ide of care, the other is neuer out of feare, nor 
                        •
                     ide of daunger.
               
            
            
               Perfection.
               
                  230 Of the Sowe and the Bitche.
                  THe Sowe and the Bitche contended aboute their nobilitie: The Bitche alleaged that of al foure footed beaſtes ſhée was the fruteful
                     
                        •
                     eſt. The Sowe quickly replied, ſaying: Séeing 
                        •
                     hou ſayſte ſo, knowe thou, that thy Whelpes be 
                        •
                     orne blinde.
                  
                     MOR. Things are not iudged by quick ſpéede, 
                        •
                     ut by full perfection.
               
            
            
               Perſeueraunce in his vocation.
               
                  231 Of the Dog and the Aſſe.
                  WHen the Dog fauned on his Lord or the ſeruaunte, they ſtroked him with their hands, and made muche of him: which thing the Aſſe marking wel, ſighed déepely, being weary of his eſtate, yea and he thought it vniuſtly appointed that the Dog ſhould ſo be beloued of all men, as to be fed at his maiſters table, & there vnto to attaine with eaſe and play: contrarywiſe, himſelfe to cary packes, to be whipped, to laboure without ceaſſing, and yet neuertheleſſe to be hated of all men: Séeing theſe things come to paſſe by fauning, he purpoſed to folowe that trade of liuing being ſo profitable: and watching a conuenient time, when his Lorde returned home, bicauſe

he woulde put the thing in triall, he ran afore t
                        •
                      méete him: incontinently he lept on him & knocked at him with his héeles. Then his maiſter cried out for helpe, which thing his ſeruauntes hearing, ranne ſpeedely to him: and the fooliſhe Aſſ
                        •
                      which thought him ſelfe ciuill and curteous, was well beaten with a ſtaffe.
                  
                     MOR. All men can not doe all things, neythe
                        •
                      all things become all men. Let no man meddle aboue his capacitie, nor goe about that, which he is moſt vntowardly in.
               
            
            
               Policie.
               
                  232 Of a Lyon and a Foxe.
                  A Lion being taken in a ſnare, endeuoured with all his force to breake the bandes: the harder he plucked, the ſtraighter he was helde. The Foxe hauing an errand that way, and ſéeing this, ſayd: O King, by no ſtrengthe maiſte
                        •
                      thou eſcape hence, but by pollicie, for the ſnare muſt be lette oute and looſed, and not drawne in. Which when the Lion had done, he ſtraightway looſed the ſnare wherewith he was bounde, and eſcaped frée.
                  
                     MOR. Pollicie is farre better than ſtrength.
               
            
            
               Pore and rich.
               
                  233 Of a Wolfe being hungry.
                  A Wolfe in his olde age not able any more to hunte, was ſore a hungred, neither coulde he

                     
                        •
                     inde any kinſman or friend which would helpe him with meat. As he therfore wandred through a great woode heauily, he chaunced vpon a deade carcaſe of an Oxe, which he had ſcarſe begon to teare, but a companie of other wolues, rauens, & crowes came thither and prayed him to receiue them as his fréends to partake of his pray: Then the Wolfe ſaid to him ſelfe: beholde me whome lately my brethrē and ſonnes regarded not, now ſtrange beaſts reuerence, & deſire my frendſhip, but they do not this honor to me, but to the Oxe.
                  
                     MOR. A poore man is hated of al men, but the rich are honoured.
               
            
            
               Pouertie praiſed.
               
                  234 Of the Horſse and the Harte.
                  THe Horſie kept warre with the Harte, and being often driuen from his meate, and put to the worſt, he lamentably deſired the aide of men, with whome he came into the field: then he that afore had the ouerthrow, became conqueror: but his enimie being ouercome, and ſubdued he himſelfe became bond too man, faine to carrie him on his backe, and a bit in his mouth. Of this fable writeth Horace.
                  
                  
                     A Hart in fight excelling much
                     the horſse, from meate him draue,
                     The ſtrife vvas long, but horſse vvas faine,
                     the helpe of man to craue.
                     
                        The bit he tooke vvith merry cheere,
                     ſtraight vanquisht vvas his foe,
                     His Ryder yet he durſt not caſt,
                     nor yet his bvt forgoe,
                     So he that dreadeth pouertie,
                     and can not vſe a meane,
                     Shall leade his life in ſeruitude,
                     and looſe his freedome cleane.
                  
               
            
            
               Praiſe not thy ſelfe.
               
                  235 Of the Ape and his yong ones.
                  
                     IVpiter ſent out a precept, commaunding all liuing things to appeare before him, yt he mighte giue iudgement whoſe ofſpring were the beſt fauored: the beaſts came running, the birds flying, and the Fiſhes ſwimming thither. Laſte of all came the Ape, and we him his yong one, at whoſe yl fauoured buttockes euery one laughed. Tuſhe (quod the Ape) whom pleaſeth God Iupiter ſhall haue the victorie, yet in my iudgement this my childe is faire, & therfore of right before all other to be preferred: whereat Iupiter alſo ſmiled.
                  
                     MOR. We and oures ſéeme good in our owne eyes, but of vs and our doings, let other iudge.
               
            
            
               Prayer.
               
                  236 Of Mariners.
                  IT hapned as many Maryners were ſayling on the ſea, that there aroſe a great tēpeſt ſodeinly: hen euery one prayed to his God for helpe, but

one amongſt the reſt, ſayde: Ye know not what yée pray, for before theſe gods can goe to the Lord for oure ſuccoure, wée ſhall periſhe throughe this ſtorme: therefore I doe thinke it beſt to pray vnto that God, which withoute the helpe of any other, can deliuer vs from this preſent daunger: Then they cried to almighty God for helpe, and ſtraight way the ſtorme ceaſed.
                  
                     MOR. We muſt not ſéeke for help at the foote, when we may goe to the head.
               
            
            
               Praiſe of our owne.
               
                  237 Of the Owle.
                  IN the aſſembly of birdes, the Eagle ſayde that he would chooſe the yong ones of other birds to ſerue in his court: and when euery one ſtroue to preferre his owne, the Owle ſayd: I pray thée (O Quéene) receiue mine, which in beautie paſſe all the reſt: why (quod the Egle) what beautie are thy ſonnes of? The Owle anſwered: Of the ſame that I my ſelfe am. Then all the Birdes laughed excéedingly.
                  
                     MOR. No childe is ſo deformed, which to his parentes ſeemeth not faire.
               
            
            
               Praiſe another for aduauntage.
               
                  238 Of a Foxe and a Dog.
                  A Fox being courſed by a Dog, and euen at ye pointe to be caught, hauing no way to ſhifte him, ſaid: why woldeſt thou deſtroy me thou

dog, ſéeing my fleſh yu canſt not eat? Go catch rather that Hare (for there was one then harde by) whoſe fleſh men iudge to be the ſwéeteſt: the dog harkened to the counſel of the Foxe, and let him goe free, purſuing the Hare, whom bycauſe of his wonderfull ſwiftneſſe he could not ouertake. Not long after, the Hare mette with the Foxe, blaming him for ſetting the Dog at him. The Foxe aunſwered him: I maruell what thou meaneſt to accuſe me, which prayſed thée ſo greatly: what wouldeſt thou haue ſayde, if I had diſprayſed thée?
                  
                     MOR. Many vnder the colour of prayſing, deuiſe vtter vndooing to ſome men.
               
            
            
               Preparation.
               
                  239 Of the Wolfe and the Porkupine.
                  ON a tyme the Wolfe béeing hungry had a fancy to deuoure a Porkupine, whome bycauſe of his ſharpe prickes he durſt not aſſayle, but inuented a craftie wile to trap him in, counſelling him not to trouble his backe with ſo many weapons in tyme of peace, ſéeing that other Archers carried none with them but when they goo to warfare: Nay (quod the Porkupine) wée muſt ſuppoſe that there is no tyme voyd of war agaynſt a Wolfe.
                  
                     MOR. A wiſe man ought always to be armed agaynſt the aſſaults of his enimies.
               
            
            
               
               Preparation to dye.
               
                  240 Of an olde man loth to dye.
                  A Certayne olde man deſired deathe whiche came to take his life from him, to ſpare him till he might make his will, and prouide all other neceſſaries fit for ſuche a iorney: whome Death aunſwered: Why haſte not thou prepared thy ſelfe béeing ſo ofte warned by me? Mary (quod he) I neuer ſawe thée afore? Why (quod Deathe) when I dayly tooke, not onely thoſe which were of like yeres to thine (of which number very fewe remayne) but alſo yong men, children and babes, was it not ſufficient warning that thou arte mortall? When thy eyes waxed dimme, thy hearing thick, other ſenſes dayly decaying, and thy body béeing worſe and worſe, did I not tell thée that I was néere at hande? and yet thou ſayeſt thou haſt no warning: wherefore I will no longer prolong the time.
                  
                     MOR. We muſte directe our lyfe, as though death were alwayes before our eyes.
               
            
            
               Preſumption.
               
                  241 Of the Aſse and the Lyon.
                  THe Cocke ſometyme fed with an Aſſe, to whom as the Lion was comming, the Cock crowed out aloude, and the Lyon ſtraightway fled (for men ſay) he is afearde at the crowing of the Cocke. The Aſſe ſuppoſing that he

ranne away bicauſe of him, wēt ſtraight after the lyon, whom when he had ſo far purſued that they were without the hearing of the Cocks crowing, the lion returned & deuoured him, who as he was dying cryed out: Ah wretch & madde body that I am, for I am borne of none that were warriors, and wherefore haue I ruſhed into the hoſte?
                  
                     MOR. Many men aſſayle their enimies which vpon ſet purpoſe doo humble them ſelues, by the which meanes they are ſlayne.
               
            
            
               Pride.
               
                  242 Of the Horſe and the Aſse.
                  SOmetyme a Horſe decked with fayre trappers and a ſaddle, greatly neyghing, ranne through a highe way, whoſe running an Aſſe laden by chaunce dyd let, he all raging and chewing his bit for anger, ſayd: Ah lither lurdeyn, why withſtandeſt thou the Horſe? Giue place or I will tread thée downe: the Aſſe durſt not once bray, but quietly auoyded. It happened as the Horſe ranne his race, his hoofe brake, who then béeyng paſte running or makyng any ſhewe, was ſpoyled of his ornaments, and after ſolde to a Tanner. The Aſſe ſeeing him comming wyth a Tanner, ſayde vnto hym: What good ſir, howe happeneth thys kynde of wéede? where is thy gilt ſadle, thy ſtudded trappers, and glittering brydle? Thus it is fitte my friende to

happen to euery one that is proude.
                  
                     MOR. Many men in their proſperitie are ſo puft vp with pride, that they cleane forget them ſelues, and all modeſtie, but for their preſumption they ſoone ſuffer aduerſitie.
               
            
            
               Proude of an others purſe.
               
                  243 Of Iupiter and the Rauen.
                  ON a tyme Iupiter mynding to create a king of the Foules, appoynted a day of aſſembly, to the ende that he which was comlyeſt ſhoulde be appoynted king. The Rauen hearing therof, and knowing his owne deformitie, gathered togither diuers feathers and decked himſelfe, that he was goodlyeſt of all. When the day appoynted was come, the Foules aſſembled togither: then Iupiter would haue made the Rauen king bycauſe of his gayneſſe, whereat the other dyſdayning, plucked euery one his feathers from him, whereof he beeing ſpoyled was a Rauen as before time.
                  
                     MOR. He that hangeth on another mans ſléeue, if he chance to fall from him, al the world ſhall know what he is.
               
            
            
               Falles of pride.
               
                  244 Of a Flea and a Lyon.
                  THe Flea came to the Lyon and ſayde: Neither feare I thée, neither arte thou ſtronger

than I, but I pray thée what is thy ſtrength? thou ſcratcheſt with thy nayles, and with thy téeth thou byteſt, ſo doth a woman fyghting with hir huſbande: but in ſtrength I far excéede thée, and if thou wilt, let vs go fight. The Trumpet béeing blowen, the Flea ſtucke faſte about hys noſethrils, byting: but the Lyon with his owne nayles tore him ſelfe till he was chafed: The Flea hauing ouercome the Lyon, ſounded the Trumpet, and reioyced: but as he flewe away, he was entangled in a Cobwebbe: and béeing ready to be deuoured, he lamented that he ſtroue with the greateſt Beaſtes, and nowe to be kilde by a vile Spider.
                  
                     MOR. This Fable is agaynſt thoſe whiche vanquiſhe greate men, and are vanquiſhed by meane perſons.
               
            
            
               Princes.
               
                  245 Of the Pecock and the Chough.
                  WHen the Birds would make them a king, the Pecocke prayed them to chooſe him for his beautie: when they ſo mynded, the Chough began to ſay: if in thy raigne the Egle purſue vs, how wilt thou helpe vs?
                  
                     MOR. Princes muſt bée choſen, not onely for their beautie, but alſo for their ſtrengthe and wiſedome.
               
            
            
               
               Promis.
               
                  246 Of a man and a Dog.
                  A Certayne man had prepared a Supper, to whiche he hadde certaine of his friendes, whoſe Dogge lykewiſe deſired an other Dogge, ſaying: Friende, come and ſuppe with mée. Which Dogge béeing come in at the doores, and ſéeing ſuche great chéere towarde, reioyced greatly, and ſayd to him ſelfe: Oh what ioy hath happened me of late, for I ſhall fill my belly ſo full, that I ſhall not be hungry to morrow: and as he wagged his tayle for ioy, bicauſe he truſted in his friende, the Cooke ſeeing him thus doo, caught him by the legges and caſt him out of the wyndow: when the Dogge was fallen, he roſe vp quickly and ran howling away: As he went another Dog met him, and aſked him what good chéere he had to ſupper, he anſwered: I was ſo out of meaſure dronke, that I knew not the way wherout I came.
                  
                     MOR. We muſt not truſt in thoſe which promiſe vs a good turne of another mans gifte.
               
               
                  247 Of a Heardman.
                  AS a Heardman kepte a Heard of Bulles, he loſt a Calfe, whom in euery deſert he ſought a long time, but when he coulde not finde hym, he prayed to Iupiter, promiſing if he would ſhew him the Théefe which ſtole his Calfe, to offer a

Gote in ſacrifice to him. It happened as he walked in a groue of Okes, he foūd that his calf was deuoured by the Lyon, whereat trembling for feare, he caſt vp his hands to heauen and ſayde: God Iupiter I promiſed to giue thee a kidde if I found the Théefe, nowe if I eſcape his hands, I will vndertake to giue thée a Bull.
                  
                     MOR. This Fable is agaynſt vnluckie men, that lacking ought, pray to finde it, which hauing found, they ſéeke to auoyde.
               
            
            
               Promotion.
               
                  248 Of a man created Cardinall.
                  A Certein merry conceited fellow, hearing his friende to be created Cardinal, came to gréet him for his promotion: he loftie and ſwelling with pride, counterfayting that he knew not hys olde friende, aſked who he was: the other beeing ready in his merry aunſwere, ſayde: I pitie thée and others that come to ſuche promotion, for as ſoone as ye haue got ſuche honours, ye léeſe ſo your fight, féeling and other ſenſes, that ye cleane forget your olde friendes.
                  
                     MOR. Some béeing promoted to dignitie, deſpiſe their olde acquaintaunce.
               
               
                  249 Of Field Miſe.
                  A Flocke of fielde Myſe appoynted to gnawe downe an Oke full of maſt that they might haue their meate the readier, ſo as they neede

not ſo ofte runne vp and downe for it. Then one wyſer than the reſt forbad them, ſaying: If wée deſtroy our noriſher, who ſhall giue foode to vs and our ſéede in time to come?
                  
                     MOR. A wiſe man ought not onely to behold things preſent, but alſo things to come.
               
            
            
               Puniſhment of vices.
               
                  250 Of a Flea
                  AS a Flea was byting a man, he was taken, who aſked what he was, ſeing he fed of him: aunſwered, he was of that kinde of beaſtes, which as nature ordeined, liued by that meanes, praying him not to kill him, bicauſe he could not doo muche harme, whereat the man laughed, ſaying: I will therefore the ſooner kill thée, bycauſe it is not lawefull to hurt any, either much or little.
                  
                     MOR. We muſt not fauour the wicked, whither their treſpaſſe be ſmall or great.
               
            
            
               Raſhneſſe.
               
                  251 Of a Fiſher.
                  A Certayne Fiſher béeing but a nouice in that arte, tooke his pypes and his nets, and went to the Sea, and ſtanding on a rocke, played firſte with his pype, ſuppoſing that by his ſwéete melodie the fiſhes would daunce: but when he had long tried that way, & could not proſper, he layd downe his pype and tooke vp his nette, which he

caſt into the Sea, wherein he drewe many Fyſhes. When he had emptied his nette and ſawe them ſkipping, he ſayde: Oh wicked Creatures, when I piped, ye would not daunce, and nowe I haue left off, ye begin to ſkip.
                  
                     MOR. This fable is againſt thoſe whiche doe any thing without aduiſement, and out of time.
               
               
                  252 Of a Currier and a Hunter.
                  ON a time a Currier came to a Hunter to bie a Beares ſkyn, for whiche he drewe money to haue payde. In faythe (quod the Hunter) preſently I haue none, but to morrow I will goe a hunting, & if I chaunce to kil a Beare, thou ſhalt haue his ſkin. The currier (to refreſh his ſpirits) wente into the foreſt with him, and bycauſe hée woulde the better beholde the paſtime betwéene the Hunter & the Beare, he climbed into an excéeding highe trée. The Hunter went boldly to the Beares Denne, who put in hys Dogs and rouzed him. It happened that the Beare ſhunned his blow, and foorthwith ſtrake the Hunter to the grounde: who knowing the nature of the beaſt to bée, to take pytie of a carcaſe: helde his breath and fayned him ſelfe to be deade. The Beare ſmelled at him euery where, and perceyuing by no meanes any life in him, departed away. When the Currier ſaw that the beaſt was gone, and that there was no daunger, he came

downe out of the trée and went to the Hunter, whom he had ariſe, and afterward demaunded what the Beare ſayde in his eare? He warned me (quod he) that hereafter I ſell not a Beares ſkinne before I haue caught him.
                  
                     MOR. We ought not accounte that we haue not, as ſure as that we haue.
               
            
            
               Religious men.
               
                  253 Of a Wolfe.
                  A Wolfe being old and not able any longer to hunt, gaue him ſelfe to religion, put vppon him a Monks attyre, and begged meate from doore to doore▪ & being rebuked by another wolfe ſayd: What wouldeſt thou I ſhoulde doe? My ſe
                        •
                     th are cute, and runne I can not, wherefore I miſtruſt otherwiſe how to liue.
                  
                     MOR. Many addicte them ſelues to Religion bicauſe they can not otherwiſe liue.
               
            
            
               Repentance to laice.
               
                  254 Of a Beare.
                  AS a Beare ſcolded by chaunce with his wife he thruſt out hir eyes, but after repenting, he was ſo graued therwith, that hée byt off hys nayles. And when in talking he ſayd, that for the loue he bare to hir he had caſt away his beſt defence: what good (quod his wife) doth this to me? Thou ſhouldeſt haue done this before thou ſcratchedſt out my eyes.
                  
                     
                     MOR. After harme done it is too late to repēt, ſéeing that which is done, can not be vndone.
               
               
                  255 Of a ſimple Countryman.
                  TThere was a Countrymā which as he came from market, heard two Cuckoes aunſwering one an other out of two ſundrie woods. And when the Cuckoe of the other wood had néere put to ſilence hys country cuckoe, he lighted off his horſſe and climbed a trée, and as well as he could, he holpe his country cuckoe with his crying. In the meane time a Wolfe deuoured his horſſe: then was hée fayne to goe home on foote, where he complayned to hys neighbours, how for the honour of his country he had holpe hys Cuckoe, wherby he had ſuffeyned greate loſſe. Then they all with one accorde payd his damages, ſuppoſing that it was not fit that any ſhould receiue hinderance, which had trauelled for their common wealth.
               
               
                  256 Of the Mule and the Horſſe.
                  A Mule eſpied a horſſe gorgeouſly decked with a gilt byt, a faire ſadle, & purple trappers, at whoſe Fortune he enuied much, ſuppoſing him to be happy, bicauſe he alwayes fared well, and went gayly: contrarywiſe, his owne eſtate in compariſon of hys to be miſerable. For (quod he) I am ouerladen with the packſaddle, and I am a dayly drudge to cary burdens. But ſhortly

after, he eſpyed the Horſſe returning from battaile ſore wounded, then he accounted his owne eſtate better than the Horſes, ſaying: I had rather get my liuing hardly with my daily labour, and to bée clad in vile aray, than after ſuch faire and trim apparell to be in daunger of my life.
                  
                     MOR. We muſt not enuie Kings and Princes bicauſe of their wealth and ſubſtance, ſéeing they are ſubiecte to many moe peryls than poore men are.
               
               
                  257 Of a Diuell.
                  A Diuill wandring through the worlde (as his maner is) marked a certaine yong man reioyſing at the deth of his parēts, wherat he was very glad: but going a little further he wept, ſéeing an other very heauie at his Fathers buriall, who being demaunded the cauſe of ſo diuers affections, aunſwered: The laughing of the ſonne for the deathe of his parents, declareth that thoſe being riche are dead, of which number very few eſcape our handes: but the wéeping is a token of the fathers pouertie: and the kingdome of Heauen, for the moſt part, is wont to belong to thoſe whiche are poore.
                  
                     MOR. Too much riches do cary a man downe to Hell.
               
            
            
               
               Riche enimies.
               
                  258 Of the Birdes.
                  THe Birdes were greatly afrayde leaſt the Dorres ſhoulde kill them with ſhooting of Balles, bicauſe they hearde that they hadde rolled togither a great heape of bals. Feare not ſayd the Sparrow, for how ſhall they ſhoote bals at vs that flie in the aire, when they can not carry them on earth but with much toyle?
                  
                     MOR. Wée néede not feare the riches of our foes, when wée ſée they lacke wit.
               
            
            
               Riottouſneſſe.
               
                  259 Of an Oxe and a Bullock.
                  AN Oxe béeing well ſtriken in age, dayly went to plow. It hapned that a yong Heyfer whiche neuer had laboured, fetched hys friſkes in the paſtures not farre off, and ſcorned the toyling of the elder, boaſting muche of hys owne libertie, that he had taſted neyther yoke nor chayn, but the others necke was worn bare with laboure. The Oxe preſently aunſwered nothing: not long after he eſpyed this royſter ledde to be ſacrificed, then he ſaide thus to him: What end hath now thy eaſy life? Thy careleſſe liuing at harts eaſe hath brought thée to ye axe, I think now thou wilt rather counſel me to labor than to toleneſſe, which is the cauſe of thy death.
                  
                     MOR. To leade an honeſt life there néedeth

trauell: the Sluggard and he that is bent to riottous liuing, ſhall come to that which he would be lothe.
               
               
                  260 Of a Boy that would not learne.
                  A Boye whiche hated learning, béeing broughte by his Father into a Schoole, coulde not be enticed by any faire meanes of his Maiſter, to ſpeake the fieſt letter of the Alphabete: Then ſayd his Maiſter, open thy mouth, for that thys Letter requireth, but he gaped and ſpake not. The Maiſter ſeeing his labor loſt, had hym ſitte amongſt his fellowes, warning them to perſuade him to ſpeake onely this Letter: then his ſchoolefellows exhorted him in the beſt maner that they coulde, ſaying: Is it ſuche a payne to ſaye A? Nay (quod the Boye) but if I ſpeake that, he would make me learn B and ſo the reſt. But neither my maſter nor my father ſhal haue the power to make me learne.
                  
                     MOR. They which are vnwilling to learne, can neuer be forced to it.
               
            
            
               Seruaunts.
               
                  261 Of the Doue and the Crowe.
                  A Doue being fed in a doue houſe was excceeding proude of hir fertilitie: The Crow hearing therof, ſayd to hir: Friend, brag no more thereof, for the more thou breedeſt, the more care thou heapeſt.
                  
                     
                     MOR. Amongeſt ſeruants, thoſe are moſt miſerable, which in time of their bondage get many children.
               
               
                  262 Of the Aſſe and the Calfe.
                  AN Aſſe and a Calfe fed togither in one paſture, by chaunce they heard the founde of a bell, which they ſuppoſed to be a ſigne that their enimies were at hand, to whom the Calfe ſayde: Let vs be packing hence fellowe, leaſt our enimies take vs priſoners. Nay, flee thou hence rather (quod the Aſſe) whom they vſe to kill & eate, for I care not, I know this, where ſoeuer I become my life ſhall be to cary burdens.
                  
                     MOR Let not ſeruants feare much to chaunge their maiſters, leaſt the laſt bée woorſer than the firſte.
               
            
            
               Shifies.
               
                  263 Of a Marchaunt and a Iewe.
                  A Certein prodigall fellowe hauing waſted al his Fathers goods, applied his minde to practiſe deceyt. It happened on a time, that he wrapped a piece of ordure in a cloute and brought it into the market, ſaying that he had a precious thing which was of ſuch force, that if any mā taſted the leaſt crum therof, he ſhould haue fulfilled whatſoeuer he thought of. But a Iew, whoſe maner is priuily to mark al things, thought if he did buy it, that he would haue o
                        •
                      his minde many

townes and lordſhips when he taſted of it (bycauſe he would be exceding riche) he came therfore ſecretly vnto him and aſked the price, whervnto this prodigall fellow ſayde: Auaunt, thou ſhalt not buy it, for thy clothes declare, that thou art not able. The Iewe ſayde to him, how knoweſt thou? tel mée the price: he anſwered .700. crownes: the Iewe payd him the money, vpon condition, that if he had fayde true, he ſhould enioy it: but when he had taſted it, he ſpit it out, and ſayd it was ordure. Then the ſeller hauing performed his promiſe, pleaded the cauſe before the Maior, and enioyed the money.
               
            
            
               Sicke folke.
               
                  264 Of a Carter.
                  A Certein Carter aſked his wagon, why that whéele which was worſt made ſo much creaking, ſéeing none of the reſt did ſo? The waggon aunſwered: Sicke folkes are wayward, and alwayes complayning.
                  
                     MOR. Diſeaſes cauſe men to complayne.
               
            
            
               Sinners.
               
                  265 Of an olde Woman.
                  MEn commonly will (if through their follie any miſchaunce happen to them) laye the blame to Fortune or the Deuill, to excuſe them ſelues, they doo ſo muche followe their appetites: wherewith the Deuill not contented, when

by chaunce he eſpyed an olde woman clymbing a trée, whence he perceyued ſhe was lyke to fal, and then the faulte would be layd on his necke, he called for witneſſes, to whome he ſayde: Beholde; that ſame olde woman hath climbed that trée without my conſente, where I ſee ſhee wyll fall: beare witneſſe therfore with mée, that I counſelled hir not to goe vp. Immediatly ſhe fel: then being demaunded why ſhe climbed that trée, anſwered, the Deuil forced me: then he brought foorth his witneſſes, and proued that ſhe did that without his aduiſe.
                  
                     MOR. Thoſe men deſerue no pardon, whiche voluntarily ſinning, blame Fortune or the Deuill therfore.
               
            
            
               Synging.
               
                  266 Of the Nightingale and the Rauen.
                  ON a ſolemne feaſt day the Egle had the birdes to dinner: after it was doone, the Eagle called foorth the Nyghtingale, whome he had to ſing ſome melodie to lyghten their hartes withall. She foorthwith ſong ſwéetely, that it delited the hearers. In the meane tyme a Rauen paſſing by, and hearing this, ſayd: I will alſo ſing wyth the Nightingale, for I haue a baſe voyce whiche ſhall be hearde farre off, and he began to croake verye lothſomely, whiche cauſed the Nyghtyngale to holde hir peace. The other

birdes were offended with the Rauen for troublyng the feaſt: then the Egle commaunded him eyther to departe, or to holde his peace: but hée aunſwered, that hée woulde ſyng, and for hir he woulde not ſtirre an inche. The Eagle commaunded him agayne to auoyde, whiche bicauſe hée ſtubbornely diſobeyed, was commaunded to be ſlayne.
                  
                     MOR. It is vayne to ſing, where the hearers are vnwilling.
               
            
            
               Simplicitie.
               
                  267 Of the Doue and the Pye.
                  THe Pie aſked the Doue what was the cauſe that ſhee alwayes buylt in one place where hir chickens were alwayes taken away: ſhe aunſwered, ſimplicitie.
                  
                     MOR. Good men are eaſyly beguyled.
               
            
            
               Slouthfulneſſe.
               
                  268 Of an Aſſe and Frog
                        •
                     .
                  AS an Aſſe laden with wood paſſed thorough a marſhe, by chaunce he ſlipped and fell, who not béeing able to aryſe, lamented & ſighed, but the Frogs whiche were in the marſhe, hearing hym ſighyng; ſayde: What wouldeſt thou doo ſirra, if thou hadſt continued here ſo long as wée haue, which for ſo ſmal a tyme dooſt ſo mourne?.
                  
                     MOR This talke maye any manne vſe to a ſlouthfull perſons, whiche for a little paynes is

troubled, béeing able eaſyly to ouercome greate affayres.
               
               
                  269 Of a Pellican.
                  THe Gooſe and the Ducke made ſometyme a greate feaſt, to the whiche they had all tame Foules, but to ſette out their Supper, they went into the wylderneſſe and founde the Pellicane, whome they brought with them to their banket, When the feaſte was doone, they all beſoughte the Pellicane to abyde with them, and not to liue ſo ſolitarily in ſuche penurie, who at length beeing ſomewhat perſuaded, continued a fewe dayes wyth them, and made greate bankets: But when hee woulde haue prayde, he was interrupted with their chattering: wherefore he left their companye, and liued the reſt of his lyfe in ſolitaryneſſe.
                  
                     MOR Who ſo will ſerue God truely, muſte do it alone quietly.
               
            
            
               Sluggardes.
               
                  170 Of a Smith and his Dog.
                  A Certayne Smyth had a whelpe, whiche all the whyle hée ſtroke on his yron, did ſléepe: but when he wente to meate, the Dogge would ſtraightewaye ariſe, and eate the crummes that fell from the Table, or bones, or any thing elſe. Whiche thing the Smith marking wel, ſayde to his Dogge: Thou wretche, I can not tell how to

                     
                        •
                     andle thée, for whyles I am buſie in my worke, thou lyeſt ſnorting and ſléeping: But when my teeth goe, thou ſtarteſt vp and waggeſt to me thy tayle.
                  
                     MOR. Idle ſluggardes whiche liue of an other mans ſweate, muſt be puniſhed according to the rigour of the law.
               
            
            
               Strength.
               
                  271 Of the Bull and the Mouſe.
                  A Mouſe did byte a Bull by the foot, & ſtraight way ran into his hole: the Bul ſhaked hys horns & ſought for his enimie, but ſee him he could not: then the mouſe laughed him to ſcorne, ſaying: Bicauſe of thy ſtrength deſpiſe not euery body, for now a ſilly Mouſe hath hurte thée, and ſcaped free.
                  
                     MOR. Let no man regarde his enimie.
               
            
            
               Stryfe.
               
                  272 Of a Weaſel.
                  A Weaſel came into a Smiths ſhop, and licked 
                        •
                     n a fyle which lay there, wherwith hir tong being torne, bled very muche: She reioyced greatly, ſuppoſing to cary away ſomething from the yron, vntill hir tong altogither was worne away.
                  
                     MOR. This fable is againſt thoſe whiche in ſtrife hurt them ſelues.
               
               
                  
                  273 Of Hares.
                  THe Hares ſometime holding war with the Eagles, required ayde of the Foxes: but they aunſwered, we would helpe you, but that we knowe what ye are, and with whom ye fight.
                  
                     MOR. They which ſtriue with their betters, ſet little by their owne health.
               
            
            
               Stripes.
               
                  274 Of the Nut tree, the Aſſe, and the Woman.
                  A Certeine Woman queſtioned with a Nut trée growing by the high way ſide, whiche was alwayes pelted with ſtones by paſſengers, why he was ſo mad, that the more he were beaten, the more encreaſe he yelded, the Walnut aunſwered: Remēber you not the old Prouerb? The Nut trée, the Aſſe, and the Woman, are al vnder one lawe: whiche thrée will doo nothing well without great ſtore of ſtripes.
                  
                     MOR. Some men make a rod oftentimes for their own tayle.
               
            
            
               Suffering wrong.
               
                  275 Of the Beare and the Bee.
                  A Beare ſometime ſtinged of a Bée, was ſo wood angry thereat, that with his nayles he tore in pieces the hiues where the Bées made hony: the Bées ſeing their hiues plucked down, their food caried away, & their yong ones ſlayne, ruſhing all at once, aſſayled the Beare, and nigh

ſtoong him to deathe. Hée hardlye ſcapyng from them, ſayde to himſelfe: howe muche better had it ben for mée, paciently to haue ſuffred the ſtinging of one Bee, thā to prouoke ſo many enimies agaynſt mee?
                  
                     MOR. Sometyme it is farre better to ſuffer wrong doone by one, than in requiting it to procure many foes.
               
            
            
               Thefie.
               
                  276 Of a Boy and his mother.
                  A Boye ſtole his Fellowes Booke oute of the Schoole, whiche he broughte to his mother: ſhe corrected him not therefore, but rather made muche of him: Who waxyng elder, ſtole greater things: and at a tyme béeing taken with the manner, he was ſtraight way ledde to execution, whome his mother followed and lamented: but he prayed the Hangman that he myghte talke a woorde or twoo in his mothers eare, who ſtraight way layd hir ear to his mouth, which he with his téeth byt off: diuers rebuked him that he had not onely played the theefe, but alſo vſed ſuche villanie to his mother. Shée (ſayde hée) is the cauſe of my vndooing: for if ſhée had chaſtized me when I ſtoale the Booke, I had not now ben ledde to hanging.
                  
                     MOR. Faultes whiche are not at the firſt corrected, doo increaſe greater.
               
            
            
               
               Time.
               
                  277 Of a Grammarian teaching an Aſſe.
                  A Certein Grammarian boaſted that he was ſo paſſing tine in his arte, that if he might haue a ſufficient reward, he would take vppon him to teache not only children, but alſo aſſes. The Prince hearing of the mans raſhneſſe, aſked hym whither he thought hee coulde teache an Aſſe within tenne yeares, if he gaue hym .50. Crownes. The ſhameleſſe manne aunſwered, that he woulde not refuſe to bée ſlayne of hym, if in that ſpace the Aſſe coulde not write and reade. His fréendes hearyng of thys, maruelled and rebuked him, bycauſe hee had promiſed to doe a thing, not onely harde, but alſo impoſſible: and they dyd feare, leaſt when the tyme hadde bene expired, he ſhould be ſlayne of the Kyng: whome he anſwered: Before this time be come out, eyther the Prince, the Aſſe, or I ſhal dye.
                  
                     MOR. Delay of time is commonly woont to bée a helpe, for thoſe whiche ſtande in daunger.
               
            
            
               Trying of friends.
               
                  278 Of a man that would trie his friends.
                  THere was a certein man very riche and liberall, whiche had many friends whom often times he had did to ſupper, to the which willingly they came, & bicauſe he might yt better know

whether they would be truſtie in time of néede, he aſſembled them togither and told them that he had foes lately vpſtart, whiche he meaned to deſtroy, praying them therefore to arme themſelues and come with him to reuenge his quarel: then euery one began to excuſe him ſelfe ſauing two, whiche he accounted for his friendes, and afterward loued them dearly, but the other he reiected.
                  
                     MOR. The beſt trier of friendes is aduerſitie.
               
            
            
               Trye all wayes.
               
                  279 Of a yong man and an old.
                  A Certein old man eſpied a yong man gathering of his frute, whome he gently entreated to come downe frō the trée, and not to purloyne his goods: but he ſpake to the winde, for he lightly regarded his age and his words. Ah (quod the olde man) I haue heard, that not only in words, but alſo in herbes force conſiſteth, whervpon he began to pluck the leaues and caſt them at him. The yong man ſéeing him do ſo, laughed out of meaſure, ſuppoſing that he doted, to driue hym downe with leaues. The old man willing to aſſaye him by gentle meanes, when he perceyued that he could nothing preuayle, ſayd: I wil proue what ſtones wil doo, for in them men ſay, there is vertue: & forthwith filled his lap with ſtones which he caſt at the yong mā, and perforce made

him come downe and departe.
                  
                     MOR. A wiſe man ought to aſſay all manner ways, before he take any weapon in hand.
               
            
            
               Trouble.
               
                  280 Of the Lyon and the Bull.
                  A Bull being afrayde of a Lyon, fled away, and by chaunce met with a Gote, who with frouning countenaunce threatned to ſtrike him with his hornes, to whom the Bull full of wrath, ſayd: It is not the knitting of thy browes feareth me, but yt the fierce Lion is ſo neer at my héeles, thou ſhouldeſt féele what it were to meddle with a Bull, and to renew his wounde.
                  
                     MOR. To the ſorowfull ought no more miſerie be added, who that hath bin once in trouble, hath taſted ſorrowe inough.
               
            
            
               Truſt in thy ſelfe.
               
                  281 Of a Larke.
                  A Certein Larke by chaunce builded hir neſt in a piece of wheat, that was ſomewhat riper than other: whence hir yong ones were not able to flie when the corne was yellowe. As ſhe was going foorth to ſéeke meate, ſhe warned them if any noueltie hapned to be done or ſayd, to marke it well, and at hir returne to certifie hir thereof: after hir departure, the owner of the corne came thither, and ſayd to a yong man his ſonne: Séeſt 
                        •••
                     t thou, that this corne is rype and néedeth la
                     
                        •
                     ourers?

to morrowe therefore by breake of daye. 
                        •
                     o to my friends, deſire them to helpe me in with my harueſt: when he had ſo ſaide, he departed. When the Larke returned to hir yong ones, they 
                        •
                     ame fluttering aboute hir, and prayed hir out of hand to haſt and carry them away, for the owner had ſent to his friendes, willing them to come the next morning to reap his corne: She had them bée of good cheer & feare nothing, for if the Lord of the ground haue remitted ye matter to his friends, to morrow it ſhall not be cut down: the next day ſhe flew a broad again for meat, ye lord waited for his bidden friends, the ſun waxed hote, but nothing was don, neyther any friend of his came. Thē ſaid be to his ſon, I ſee wel that theſe my frends for the moſt part are loyterers, let vs therefore entreate our kinſfolkes and neyghboures to morrowe betimes to come: hir Chickens were then afrayd and tolde it to their mother: ſhe had them to leaue off feare and care, for none of alliance would be ſo obedient as to come at a becke, eſpecially to labour. The nexte morning ſhe went abroad as before, his kinſfolkes lefte the worke vndone: The owner ſeeing that, ſayde to his ſonne: Adieu both friends and Couſins, bring thou to morrow at the break of day two ſickles, one for mée, another for thee, and we with our owne handes will reape it. When hir yong ones tolde hir this, ſhe ſayd: It is

time to be packing, for that he ſayd with out do
                        •
                      ſhall come to paſſe: for on him that ought it, th
                        •
                      labour is turned, not where it was required: an
                        •
                      thus the Lark ſhifted hir neſt, and the corne wa
                        •
                      reaped. Héereof Ennius writeth theſe tw
                        •
                      verſes.
                  
                     This ſentence in thy minde,
                     beare thou in any wiſe:
                     Looke for no helpe of friendes,
                     where thy helpe may ſuffiſe.
                  
               
            
            
               Trusting mortall things.
               
                  282 Of an Aſſe.
                  A Certaine poore man which had nothing but 
                        〈◊〉
                      barrell of Wine and an Aſſe, had maried hi
                        •
                      only daughter to a certaine yong man, promiſing hym ſomewhat in franke mariage which he thought to gather of his Wine and th
                        •
                      Aſſe (for he had determined to ſell them) but th
                        •
                      nexte nyght after that the bridale was kepte, th
                        •
                      Aſſe died, who as he was dying, brake the veſſel with his héeles, and ſpylt the Wine.
                  
                     MOR. We muſt put no truſt in tranſitorie things.
               
            
            
               
               Truth hateth iesting.
               
                  283 Of one that played the part of Chriſt.
                  A Certain Countreyman playing the parte of Chriſt in a playe, was beaten and euill entreated of the Iewes, wherfore he flang way the croſſe and ſayde: The Deuill bée your God, for I wil not. Then a Baker 
                        •
                     ooke his part, 
                        •
                     home the Iewes lykewiſe did h
                        ••
                     d
                        •
                     e opprobri
                     
                        •
                     uſly: whiche thing the pacient ſuffered, but an 
                        •
                     ther ſayd to him, Meale ſtealer: then the Baker 
                        •
                     unſwered, hold thy tong, or elſe & wil ouerthrow 
                        •
                     hée with my croſſe.
                  
                     MOR. Truthe can abyde no ieſting, neyther 
                        •
                     enne that are guiltie willingly heare of any ie
                     
                        •
                     ting of their dooings.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋayne deſires.
               
                  284 Of the Harte.
                  A Hart beholding himſelfe in a cleare water, allowed much his fayre forhead and breade hornes, but the ſmalneſſe of his legs he condemned. As he was thus viewing and iudging, there came a Hunter vppon him: the Hart fledde away very ſwiftly, the Dogs purſued him: but being entred into a thick wood, his horns were wrapt faſt in the boughs: then he prayſed his legs and diſprayſed his hornes, which cauſed him to be taken.
                  
                     MOR. Things whiche do hurt we do hunt after, but good things we deſpiſe.
               
               
                  
                  285 Of a Countryman and Hercules.
                  A Countrymans Carte ſtucke faſte in a déepe mire: ſtraight way he beſought helpe of Hercules. To him an anſwer was giuen: Thou dolte whip on thy horſſe, and lifte thou forwarde thy whéeles, and then call on Hercules, and he wyll be ready at hand.
                  
                     MOR. Vayne requeſtes do not auayle, whiche God will not heare, helpe thy ſelfe, and then god will helpe forward.
               
            
            
               Vaineglory.
               
                  286 Of a byting Dog.
                  A Certein man had a Dog which often times had byt many, whervppon he tyed a clog on his necke, that men might take héed of hym. The Dog ſuppoſing that to be geuen him for a commendation of his courage, deſpiſed his companions: then one of them tolde him of his blindneſſe, that he wore that clog with ſhame, and not with honour.
                  
                     MOR A vaynglorious foole ſometime counteth yt to be hys prayſe, which is vtterly to his ſhame.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋaliant death.
               
                  287 Of the Hog and the Horſſe.
                  A Hog eſpied a barded Horſe, whyche was ſet out to warfare well appointed, to whom he ſayde: Whether makeſt thou ſuche haſt thou foole, perhaps thou ſhalte be ſlayne in battayle:

The Horſe aunſwered him, though thou doo nothing worthy of prayſe, but being fat lieſt wallowing in the myre, yet a little knyfe thy life ſhall diſpatch, whereas great renoume after my death I haue.
                  
                     MOR. It is better to die valiauntly, thā to prolong thy life led wickedly.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋndefiled life.
               
                  288 Of the Swan and the Crowe
                  THe Rauen enuied the Swanne for his whiteneſſe, whome with all pollicie he endeuoured to defile and make black: and bycauſe he coulde not worke his will whiles the Swan waked, he practiſed it when ſhe ſlept. Wherefore he came in a night the Swanne ſléeping on hir neſt, and wyth hys blackneſſe polluted hir and made hir black. When day was vp and the Swanne awaked, who ſaw hir ſelf thus painted, ſhe waſhed hir ſelfe continually, till ſhe became faire.
                  
                     MOR. Who ſo will be bliſſed, lette him kéepe him ſelfe vndefiled.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋndoing him ſelfe.
               
                  289 Of a Thruſh.
                  A Thruſh being caught with birdlime of a fouler, did torment hir ſelfe, ſaying: The pangs of death gréeue me not ſo muche, as that my owne things are my deſtruction: for men ſay, that birdlime is made of Thruſhes doung.
                  
                     
                     MOR. Then are men moſt gréeued, when their owne doings do ſlay them.
               
            
            
               Vnequall mariage.
               
                  209 Of the Lion and the Mouſe.
                  A Lion ſometime caught in a ſnare, was ſo entangled: that he could not wind out himſelf, wherevpon he deſired the Mouſe to gnawe aſunder the ginne, promiſing a recompen
                        •
                     e for his good turne. Which thing when the Mouſe had quickly done, he required the Lion to giue him his daughter in mariage: the Lion (to requite hys benefactor) graunted hir vnto him When the newe maried wife was come vnto hir Huſbande, by chaunce not ſéeing him, trode on him, and burſt him all to pieces.
                  
                     MOR. Al mariages and matches vnequally made, are not to be allowed.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋnthankefulneſſe.
               
                  291 Of Ryuer.
                  A Certaine Ryuer checked hys headſpring, as being a ſtanding water, neyther hauing any fyſhes: but him ſelfe he highly commended, bycauſe he bred goodly fiſhes, and pleaſantly ran through the valleys. The headſpring fretting at the vnthankfulneſſe of the Ryuer, ceaſed his wonted courſe, whereby the Riuer wanting bothe his fiſhes and his pleaſaunt noyſe, dryed vp.
                  
                     MOR. Some claime as their own, whatſoeuer

they doe, robbing God of his honour, from whom all goodneſſe doth procéede.
               
            
            
               A wiſe Ape.
               
                  292 Of a Serpent.
                  A Serpent beyng ouerwhelmed with a greate ſtone, deſired a man that traueled yt way, to roll off the burdē frō him, promiſing to gyue him a great treaſure if he would do it. Whiche when the gentle fellow had done, the Serpent did not only breake his promiſſe, but alſo ſayd the man was worthy to die. As they thus ſtroue, it happened that the ape paſſed that way, who being choſen iudge betwene them, ſayde: I can not ende ſo great ſtryfe betwene you, excepte I ſee firſt howe the ſerpent ſtood vnder the ſtone. Whē the man had layd the ſt
                        •
                     ne vppon the Serpent, he ſayd: I thinke that vnthankfull beaſt ought to remayne vnder the ſtone.
                  
                     MOR. Vnthankful men are worthy of no good turne.
               
               
                  293 Of a man that brake an Image.
                  A Certein man had a woodden Image, whome he prayed to beſtowe ſome benefite on him, but the more hée prayed, the more he liued in pouertie: Wherewyth he béeing angrye, caught his Image by the leggs, and ſloong hym againſt a wall, wherewith hys heade being broken, great abundance of golde came out, whiche as

he gathered, he ſayd: thou art froward as I think for whiles I did reuerence thée, thou didſt me no good, but when thou waſt well beaten, thou haſ
                        •
                      yelded much riches.
                  
                     MOR. A naughty man wil do much more good by beating than by honoring him.
               
               
                  294 Of an Aſſe and a Rauen.
                  AN Aſſe hauing a galled back, fedde in a medow, on whom a Rauen did ſit and picked at his ſore, wherat the Aſſe brayed and ſkipped▪ The horſkéeper ſtāding a far off, laughed therat▪ whome as a Wolfe paſſing by eſpied, he ſayde▪ Alas, if we poore wretches ſhould doe ſo muche, we ſhould be purſued, but at him they laugh.
                  
                     MOR Wicked men only peeping abroad ar
                        •
                      forthwith knowne.
               
               
                  295 Of a Dog.
                  A Certen rich man, much giuē to hunting, did kéepe many dogs, wherof one bit his ſonne that he dyed: Their maiſter béeing wroth, commaunded to ſlay not only the man killer, but alſo all the reſte: then ſayd one of them, one hath offended, but all are puniſhed.
                  
                     MOR. The wickedneſſe of one, often hurteth many.
               
               
                  296 Of the Nurſe and the Wolfe.
                  A Woman ſometime had a chylde to nurſſe, whom ſhe thretned to caſt to the wolfe excep
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        •
                     e left his crying. It happened that the Wolfe 
                        •
                     aſſing that way, hearde what ſhe ſayde: where
                     
                        •
                     ppon béeing in good hope, he wayted ſtill at the 
                        •
                     oore. The childe at length béeing ſtilled, fell a 
                        •
                     léepe, the wolfe returned faſting into the couerte with a Flea in his eare. The ſhée Wolfe aſked 
                        •
                     or his pray. Mary (quod he ſighing) I was decey
                     
                        •
                     ed, a Nurſe promiſed to caſt me a boy that cryed, 
                        •
                     ut ſhe did not.
                  
                     MOR. No credit is to be had in a woman.
               
               
                  297 Of a Woman that wept for hir husbande.
                  THere was a yong Woman whoſe huſbande lay at the point of death, whome with theſe 
                        •
                     ords hir father comforted, ſaying: Daughter, 
                        •
                     exe not ſo muche thy ſelfe, for I haue prouided 
                        •
                     hée a huſbande, muche fayrer than he is, whyche 
                        •
                     hall ſoone driue away thy longing for this: but 
                        •
                     his woman would not harkē to hir fathers talke, 
                        •
                     ut blamed him for making mention ſo haſtily: yet when hir huſband was dead, ſhe aſked hir father, wéeping, if the yong man were néere, which he ſayd ſhould be hir huſband.
                  
                     MOR. The loue whiche women haue to theyr huſbands ſoone, weareth away, after they bée dead.
               
               
                  298 Of a Woman beaten.
                  A Certeyne Woman ſore beaten of hir huſbande, fayned hir ſelfe deade, to make hym

afrayde, for ſhe hild hir breath, and lay with hir face vpward, not once ſtirring: Thys wiſe man knowing well the fetches of women, ſayd: The deade beaſt muſt bée flayde, and he caught vp a knife, and began to flay the ſkin from hir féete: ſhe perceiuing the ende of hir diſſimulation, plucked backe hir féete, and ſtraight way aroſe.
                  
                     MOR. Womens wyles are practiſed in vayne againſt wiſe men.
               
               
                  299 Of the Widow and the grene Aſſe.
                  A Certeyne Widow being weary of leading a ſingle lyfe, deſired to mary, but ſhe durſt not, bycauſe ſhée feared the mocking of the people, which reported euill of thoſe that were twice maried: but hir godmother ſhewed her by this pollicie, how lightly rumors are to be regarded: ſhe commaunded hir to take the white Aſſe ſhe had, and cauſe him to be paynted gréene, and then to leade him through euery ſtreate, which thing at the firſt ſight was ſo wondred at, that not only childrē, but alſo old men, moued with this ſtrange Wonder, followed the Aſſe, to behold him, which being dayly led through the citie, they ceaſed too wonder at. Then ſayde hir godmother, the like ſhall happen to thée, for if thou mary, thou ſhalte for a fewe dayes bée a byworde to the people, but within a while after, there ſhall not be a word ſpoken of it.
                  
                     
                     MOR. Nothing is ſo wonderfull, that in continuance of time will not ceaſſe to be wondred at.
               
               
                  300 Of the Rauen and the Foxe.
                  A Rauen ſomtime hauing got his pray, made a great noyſe in the boughes, whome the Foxe ſéeing thus reioyce, ranne vnto hir, and ſayde: I gréete you with all my heart, I haue often hearde reports to be vntrue, but now in deede I fynde it: 
                        •
                     or as I paſſed by this way, by chaunce I eſpyed 
                        •
                     hee in a trée, I am therfore come vnto thee, being 
                        •
                     ffended with reporte: for they ſaye that thou arte blacker than pitche, but in my ſight thou arte whiter than ſnowe. In my iudgemente thou paſſeſt the Swan, thou art fairer than white yuie: If thy voyce were agreable to thy beautie, I wold ſooner account thée the Quéene of all birdes. The Rauen allured with this ſmoothe tale, prepared him ſelfe to ſing. In the meane whyle, the praye 
                        •
                     ell out of his bill, whiche the Foxe caughte vp, laughing excéedingly, wherof the ſillie Rauen, being aſhamed, repented his follie.
                  
                     MOR. Eſchue vaynglorie, and that venemous ſect of Flatterers may eaſily be auoyded: but if thou couet to be magnified, maiſter Paraſite will wayte on you at an inche.
               
               
                  301 Of the Dogge and the Sheepe.
                  A Dog brought an action againſt a Shéepe for a loafe of bread which he ought him, the ſhepe

denied it, wherevpon they ioyned iſſue, then the Dog brought in the Kight, the Wolf, and the Rauen to beare witneſſe to the debt, who affirmed it for truthe: the Shéepe was condemned, whom the Dog caught, and pulled the ſkinne from his backe.
                  
                     MOR. It is well known, that by falſe witneſſe many are oppreſſed and ouercome.
               
               
                  302 Of a Dog and a Butcher.
                  SOmetime a Dogge had ſtolne a péece of fleſhe from a Butcher in the market, and ſtreight ran away: the Butcher being colde at the harte wyth the loſſe of the thing, firſt held his peace: then remembring hymſelfe, cried out after him, ſaying: O vile theefe, for this time runne ſafely, thou goeſt ſcotfrée for thy ſwiftneſſe, but hereafter I will watche thée narrowlier.
                  
                     MOR. The burnt hande feareth the fire.
               
            
            
               Eſcaping of daungers hard.
               
                  303 Of the Harte and the Oxen.
                  A Harte being purſued of a hunter, ran into an Oxe ſtall, praying the Oxen to hide him in the rack: they tolde him that there was no ſafe harboring, for both their maiſter & his ſeruants would come thither: He anſwered yt he was ſafe inough ſo that they would not bewray him: the ſeruants came in, and miſtruſting nothing to be hid in the hey, departed: the Hart was excéedingly glad, and

feared nothing. Then one of the Oxen older and wiſer than the reſt, ſayd to him: It is an eaſy mater to deceiue him that is as blinde as a Mole, but if thou eſcape our maiſter, which hath an hundred eyes, I will warrant thée: Streight after came in the maiſter to redreſſe his ſeruants negligēce, looked rounde aboute, and groping in the racke, felte the hornes of the Hart, and cryed out for his ſeruants, who ſtraightway came, tooke the beaſt and ſlue him.
                  
                     MOR. When one is in perill, it is harde to finde a place to hide him in, eyther it is that Fortune toſſeth the oppreſſed, or that béeing afrayde, and vncertaine what to do, thorough follie they betray themſelues.
               
            
            
               Wiſdome.
               
                  Of the Hare and the Foxe.
                  THe Hare iudged him ſelfe worthy to be preferred before the Foxe, bycauſe in ſwift running he far paſſed him: the fox aunſwered, I haue a more excellent wit, wherby I do oftner begyle the Dogs, than thou with thy ſwiftneſſe.
                  
                     MOR. Wiſdome far paſſeth ſtrength or ſwiftneſſe.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   