
      
         
            
            
            
               ¶ A new balade entituled as foloweth.
            
            
               
                  ¶ To ſuch as write in Metres, I write
                  Of ſmall matters an exhortation,
                  By readyng of which, men may delite
                  In ſuch as be worthy commendation.
                  My verſe alſo it hath relation
                  To ſuch as print, that they doe it well,
                  The better they ſhall their Metres ſell.
               
            
            
               ✿ And when we haue doen al that euer we can,
               Let vs neuer ſeke prayſe at the mouth of man.
            
            
               
                  HORACE, that noble Poet did write
               In his learned booke, the arte of Poetrie
               Notable thinges, of which to reſite
               One is now to be noted ſpeciallie
               In theſe our dayes, and wot ye whie?
               For ſome there be, take matters in hand
               Chiefly in Metre, to ſhew their fancie
               As did in his dayes, a certaine band.
            
            
               ¶ Read in his bookes, and then vnderſtand,
               They vexed his eares, they troubled his eyes
               With Metres in number, compared to ye ſand:
               And lacked not ſuch, as wolde to the ſkyes
               So prayſe their workes (ſuch was their guyſe)
               And alſo extoll their Metres ſo
               With wordes freuolous, and manifeſt lyes,
               That lyke vnto them, there was no mo.
            
            
               ¶ But what ſaith HORACE, afore we go
               Any further herein? becauſe they did vſe
               To procure freendes, leſt that their fo
               Shoulde paint them out, and ſo accuſe
               Their doinges in verſe, and their abuſe
               Which men to praiſe them, were not ſo preſt
               As Horace agayne wolde ſtyll refuſe
               To admit that number in to his breſt.
            
            
               ¶ Such coulde not dwell in his ſtudie or cheſt
               
                  LVCILIVS, with other in Horace dayes
               Was one which he coulde not diſgeſt
               His verſe in wordes, or ſence alwayes
               For the moſt parte deſerued ſmall prayſe.
               And why? becauſe he had more reſpect
               To couet the garland, of Lawrel or Bayes
               For number rather, then verſe ſelect.
            
            
               ¶ For when by writing men doe detect
               Their wyſedome, or els their follie in deede
               Yf it be fooliſh, they doe correct
               Or ought that can, and that with ſpeede
               As HORACE did: the vnſkylfull breede
               Of Poets that wrote in his time (I ſay)
               The workes of ſuch, as ye may read,
               Continue not long, but fall away.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Such ſpices & wares as come from the ſea
               They be good to vſe from towne to towne,
               To the Pedler they be a right good ſtay
               To put in his ſtuff, blacke white or browne,
               Good for the Maſter, and good for ye Clowne
               To make (as ye know) the matter cleane,
               Good to toke vp, and good to caſt downe
               When ye haue doen, ye know what I meane.
            
            
               ¶ Your balades of loue not worth a beane
               A number there be, although not all,
               Some be pithie, ſome weake, ſome leane
               Some doe runne as round as a ball:
               Some verſes haue ſuch a pleaſant fall
               That pleaſure it is for any man
               Whether his knowledge be great or ſmall
               So that of a verſe ſome ſkyll he can.
            
            
               ¶ But ſome yf ye take in hand to ſkan
               They lacke their grace, they lacke good ſence,
               The Printer ſhoulde therfore with his fan
               Pourge chaff from corne, to auoyde offence.
               And not for lucre, vnder pretence
               Of newes, to print what commeth to hand,
               But that which is meete to bring in pence
               Let him print, the matter well ſtand:
            
            
               ¶ Our englyſh men, ſome out of the land
               A ſorte of Rebelles ſturdye and ſtoute,
               with our pope holy men, that ouerthwart band
               At Louaine, with open ſclander breath oute.
               What enuie can doe, to bryng in doubte
               The godly workes well written of late
               Of learned men, and now go aboute
               To ſtirre vp againſt vs warre and debate.
            
            
               ¶ Wherfore let vs not open a gate,
               Eyther the Printer, or they which write
               To ſuch as they be, knowyng their ſtate,
               Their ſclanderous pen doth cruelly byte.
               Let them not ſay that thoſe which endyte
               Lacke knowledge in that, the pen doth expreſſe,
               Let them not ſay that a rauenyng Kyte
               Is as good as a Larke, at a Printers meſſe.
            
            
               ¶ But now leſt ye thinke me to vſe exceſſe
               I wyll to an end my ſelf prepare,
               Wyſhyng all them that wyll adreſſe
               Their pen to Metres, let them not ſpare
               To folow Chawcer, a man very rare,
               Lidgate, Wager, Barclay and Bale:
               VVith many other that excellent are,
               In theſe our dayes, extant to ſale.
            
            
               ¶ Let writers not couet the bottom or dale
               Yf they may come to the hyll or brinke,
               And when they haue written their learned tale
               The Printer muſt vſe good paper and inke.
               Or els the reader may ſometime ſhrinke
               When faulte by inke or paper is ſeene,
               And thus euery day before we drinke
               Let vs pray God to ſaue our Queene. Amen.
            
            ¶ FINIS.
            
            by R. B.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at S. Katherins beſyde the Towre of London, by Alexander Lacie.
         
      
   