
      
         
            
            
            ARTICLES To be inquired of by the Church-wardens and ſworne-men, in the ordinarie viſitation of the Reuerend Father in God, LANCELOT Lord Biſhop of ELIE, within the Dioceſſe of Elie, Ann. 1613.
            AT CAMBRIDGE Printed by Cantrell Legge. 1613.
         
         
            
            The tenor of the Oath of the Church-wardens and ſworne-men.
            
            YOu ſhall ſweare, that vpon due conſideration of theſe Articles giuen you in charge, you ſhall preſent euery ſuch perſon of or within your Pariſh, as you ſhall know to haue committed any offence, or omitted any dutie mentioned in any of theſe Articles, or which are publikely defamed, or vehemently ſuſpected of any ſuch offence or negligence. So helpe you God by the contents of his holy Goſpell.
         
      
      
         
            
            Articles.
            
               Touching the Church.
               
                  WHETHER is your Church or Chappell, with the Chauncell thereof, and euery part of either of them, well and ſufficiently repaired, the windowes well glaſed, the floares paued plaine and euen, without duſt, or any thing noiſome or vnſeemely?
               2. Whether is your Churchyard well fenced with walles, rayles, pales, as hath beene accuſtomed: if not, whoſe default is it?
               3. Whether hath there beene any fighting, chiding, brawling, or quarrelling, any plaies, feaſts, temporall Courts or Leets, lay Iuries, muſters, or other prophane vſage in your Church or Churchyard: any bels ſuperſtitiouſly rung on holy dayes or their Eues, or at any other time, without good cauſe allowed by the Miniſter and Churchwardens: haue any trees beene felled in your churchyard, and by whom?
               4. Whether is the manſion houſe of your Parſon, Vicar, or Curate, with all the buildings therunto belonging, your Pariſh Almes-houſe, and church houſe ſufficiently repaired, maintained, and to godly and their right vſes employed?
               5. Whether haue you in your church the Bible in the largeſt volume, the booke of common prayer lately authoriſed by his Maieſtie, the books of Homilies allowed, the two Pſalters, a conuenient pulpit for the preaching, a decent ſeat for the miniſter to ſay ſeruice in conueniently placed, a ſtrong cheſt with an hole in the lidde, and three locks and keies, one for the Miniſter, the other for the Churchwardens, for the Almes of the poore, and the keeping of the Regiſter booke of the Chriſtenings, mariages, and burials?
               6. Whether haue you in your Church a Font of ſtone for baptiſme, ſet in the auncient vſuall place, a decent table for the Communion conueniently placed, couered with ſilke or other decent ſtuffe in time of diuine ſeruice, and with a faire linen cloath ouer that at the adminiſtration of the Communion?
               7. Whether haue you all ſuch bells, ornaments, and other vtenſils as haue aunciently belonged to your Church, a communion cup of ſiluer with a couer, a faire ſtanding pot or ſtoope of pewter or purer mettall, for the wine vpon the communion table, a comely ſurpleſſe with ſleeues, a Regiſter booke of parchment for chriſtenings, marriages, and burials,

booke for the name of all ſtrange preachers, ſubſcribed with their names, and the name of the Biſhop or others where they had licence?
               8. Whether is your almes for your poore quarterly at the leaſt diſtributed by you the church-wardens and the Miniſter in the preſence of ſixe of the chiefe Pariſhioners to your poore? And are weekely the names and ſurnames of all perſons married, chriſtened, and buried, and of their Parents, with the day and yeare, entred in your ſaid parchment booke, and is euery leafe beeing full, ſubſcribed by you the Miniſter and churchwardens?
               9. Whether are the tenne commandements ſet vp in the eaſt ende of the church, and other choſen ſentences of holy Scripture vpon the wals in conuenient places: are all your ſeates in your church in good repaire, cleanly kept, conueniently placed, and the Pariſhioners in them, or elſewhere orderly ſet, and is there no contention or ſtriuing for any ſeat or place among them?
            
            
               Touching the Miniſtrie, Seruice, and Sacraments.
               WHether is the common prayer ſaid or ſung by your Miniſter both morning & euening diſtinctly & reuerently, euery Sonday and holy-day and on their Eues, and at conuenient and vſuall times of thoſe dayes, and in moſt conuenient place of the church for the edifying of the people?
               2. Whether doth your Miniſter obſerue the orders, rites, and ceremonies preſcribed in the booke of common prayer, in reading the holy Scriptures, prayers, and adminiſtration of the Sacraments, without diminiſhing, in regard of preaching or any other reſpect, or adding any thing in the matter or forme thereof?
               3. Whether doth your Miniſter on wedneſdayes and fridaies, not being holydaies, at the accuſtomed houres of ſeruice reſort to the church and ſay the Letanie preſcribed, and doth your clarke or ſexton giue warning before by tolling of a bell on thoſe dayes?
               4. Whether doth your Miniſter as oft as he adminiſtreth the communion, firſt receiue it himſelfe. Whether doth he vſe any bread or wine newly brought, before the words of inſtitution be rehearſed, and the bread and wine preſent on the table, doth he not deliuer the bread and wine to euerie communicant ſeuerally?
               5. Whether doth your Miniſter giue warning publikly in the church at morning prayer the Sonday before hee adminiſtreth the communion for the better preparation of the pariſhioners?
               6. Whether hath your Miniſter admitted to the communion any

notorious ſinner openly knowne or defamed, or any who hath openly and maliciouſly contended with his Neighbour, before repentance and reconciliation made and done by appointment of the Ordinarie?
               7. Whether hath your Miniſter admitted to the communion any church-warden or Side-man, who hath wittingly and willingly neglected, contrarie to his oath, to preſent any publike offence or ſcandall, beeing mooued to preſent either by ſome of his neighbours, the Miniſter, or his Ordinarie?
               8. Whether hath your Miniſter adminiſtred the Communion to any but ſuch as kneele, or doe any refuſe to kneele: hath he adminiſtred to any who refuſeth to be preſent at Publike prayer: or who hath depraued the Booke of common prayer, adminiſtration of the Sacraments, or the Rites and Ceremonies preſcribed, or the Articles of Religion agreed vpon, or the Booke of ordering Preiſts and Biſhops; or againſt his maieſties Supremacie; or haue any beene for theſe cauſes repelled, and haue they repented in writing, or otherwiſe, and what be their names?
               9. Whether hath your Miniſter more Benefices then one, if he haue, how farre diſtant are they, how often is he abſent in the yeare: when he is abſent, hath he an allowed preacher for his Curate?
               10. Whether is your Miniſter an allowed Preacher, if he be, doth he euery Sunday in your church, or ſome other neere adioyning, where no Preacher is, preach one Sermon euery Sunday?
               11. Whether doth your Miniſter beeing no Preacher allowed, preſume to expound the Scripture in his owne Cure, or elſe where doth he procure euery moneth a Sermon to be preached in his cure by Preachers lawfully licenſed, and on euery Sunday when there is no ſermon, doth he or his Curate read ſome one of the Homilies preſcribed?
               12. Whether is your Curate allowed by the Ordinarie, vnder his hand and ſeale, to ſerue for your cure, and whether doth he ſerue two churches or chappels in one day?
               13. Whether doth your Miniſter in ſaying the publike prayers, and adminiſtring the Sacraments, weare a decent ſurpleſſe with ſleeues, and beeing a graduate, doth he weare therewith a hood, by the order of the Vniuerſities, agreeable to his degree?
               14. Whether hath your Miniſter or any other Preacher in your church, preached any thing to confute and impugne any Doctrine deliuered by any other Preacher, and hath he and they praied for Chriſts catholike church, as is preſcribed by the canon?
               
                  15. Whether hath or doth any preach in your church, which refuſeth to conforme himſelfe to the Lawes, Rites, and ordinances eſtabliſhed, or which hath not firſt ſhewed a ſufficient licence?
               16. Whether doth your Miniſter in his ſermons, foure times in the yeare at the leaſt, teach and declare the Kings Maieſties power within his Realmes to be the higheſt power vnder God, to whom, all within the ſame owe moſt loyaltie and obedience, and that all forraine power is iuſtly taken away?
               17. Whether doth your Miniſter euery ſunday and Holyday, halfe an houre before euening prayer or more, examine and inſtruct the youth in the ten commandements, the Beleefe, the Lords prayer, and the catechiſme ſet forth in the Booke of common Prayer?
               18. Whether hath your Miniſter maried any which haue not bin three ſeuerall Sundayes or Holidayes asked in your Church in the time of Diuine ſeruice, without licence, and hath he with licence or without married any, wherof neither dwelt in your Pariſh, or with any licence but only from the Biſhop of Elie, or his Chancellers, or from his grace of Canterbury?
               19. Whether hath your Miniſter with licence or without, married any at any other times then betweene the houres of Eight and Twelue in the fore-noone, or in any priuate houſe, or when there is no licence, before their Parents and Gouernours (the parties beeing vnder the age of 21. yeares) haue teſtified their conſents?
               20. Whether doth your Miniſter declare to the people euery Sunday at the time appointed, what Holydaies and faſting-dayes be the weeke following? doth he beeing a Preacher, conferre with all Recuſants and perſons Excommunicate or ſuſpended? beeing no Preacher, doth he procure a ſufficient Preacher to reclaime them thereby?
               21. Whether doth your Miniſter keepe a Note of all perſons excommunicate, and once euery ſixe moneths doth he denounce them which haue not obtained their abſolution, on ſome Sunday in ſeruice time, that others may be admoniſhed to refraine their company?
               22. Whether doth your Miniſter hauing notice giuen him, diligently viſit the ſicke (the Diſeaſe not beeing infectious,) doth he inſtruct and comfort them, doth he then mooue them to make their Teſtaments, and remember the poore, and other workes of charitie, and the paſſing Bell tolling, doth he then neglect his laſt dutie?
               23. Whether hath your Miniſter refuſed to baptize any Childe brought to the Church vpon any Sunday or holiday, or to burie any

Corps brought into the Church or churchyard, or to church any women hauing had conuenient warning thereof?
               24. Whether hath your Miniſter beeing truely enformed of the danger of death of any Infant vnbaptized, and beeing deſired to goe to the place where the child is, to baptize it, neglected to goe, by meanes whereof the child died vnbaptized?
               25. Whether doth your Miniſter at any time preach or adminiſter the Communion in any priuate houſe, except when any are ſo impotent that they cannot goe to Church, or verie dangerouſly ſicke?
               26. Whether hath your Miniſter held or appointed any publik faſt, or beene preſent at ſuch, doth he or any other in your Pariſh hold any lecture or exerciſe, or attempt by faſting or prayer, or otherwiſe, to caſt out any Deuills, without the licence of the Biſhop vnder his hand and ſeale?
               27. Whether hath there beene any ſecret conuenticles or meetings in your pariſh by any Prieſt, Miniſters, or others, tending to the deprauing of the forme of prayer, doctrine, gouernment of the Church?
               28. Whether doth your Miniſter in his iourney, weare a cloake with ſleeues called a preiſts cloake, without gards, welts, long buttons, or cuts?
               29. Whether doth your Miniſter weare a wrought night-cap abroad, or a peccadilly, with a broad falling band, or doth hee weare any cut or pinckt apparell, doth he in publike goe in his Dublet and Hoſe, without a coat or caſſocke, and doth he weare any light coloured ſtockings?
               30. Whether doth your Miniſter reſort to any Tauerns or Ale-houſes, except for his honeſt neceſſities, or doth hee boord or lodge in any ſuch place, doth he vſe any baſe or ſeruile labour, drinking, ryot, dice, cards, tables, or any other vnlawfull games? is he contentious, a hunter, hawker, ſwearer, dauncer, ſuſpected of incontinencie, or giue euill example of life?
               31. Whether is there in your pariſh any Miniſter or Deacon, who hath forſaken his calling, vſing himſelfe in his courſe of life as a gentleman or other lay man?
            
            
               Touching Schoole-maſters.
               WHether haue you in your Pariſh any Schoole-maſter, who teacheth either in publike Schoole, or priuate houſe, doth he giue any euill example of life, is he allowed by the Ordinarie, or doth your Miniſter or Curate teach, and is he allowed in like manner?
               2. Whether doth your Miniſter or Schoolemaſter, who teacheth, teach the catechiſme by authoritie ſet forth, doth he when there is any

ſermon or diuine ſeruice, bring his Schollers to church, & ſee thē quietly and ſoberly ordered, doth he examine them after their returne what they haue learned of the ſermon?
               3. Whether doth he at other times teach them ſuch ſentences of holy Scripture as may induce them to godlineſſe, doth he teach the Grammar ſet forth by King Henrie the eight, continued by King Edward the ſixt, and Queene Elizabeth?
               4. Whether hath he ſpoken, writ, or taught againſt any thing whereunto he formerly ſubſcribed, as the Kings ſupremacie, the Articles of religion, Booke of common prayer, or any thing therein contained?
            
            
               Touching the Pariſh Clarke and Sexton.
               WHether haue you a Pariſh Clarke ſufficient for his place, of the age of 20, yeares at the leaſt, is he of honeſt conuerſation, can he read, write, and ſing, is he diligent in his office, and ſeruiceable to his Miniſter, and not giuen to ouermuch drinke?
               2. Whether doth your Clarke meddle with any thing aboue his Office, as churching of women, burying of the dead, reading of Prayers, or ſuch like?
               3. Whether doth your Clarke or Sexton, keep your church cleane, the doors ſafe locked, is any thing by his default loſt or ſpoiled in the church, doth he ſuffer vnſeaſonable ringing, or any prophane exerciſe in your Church?
               4. Whether doth your Clarke or Sexton, when one is paſſing out of this life, neglect to toll a Bell hauing notice thereof: or the partie beeing dead, doth he ſuffer any more then one ſhort peale, and before his buriall one, and after the ſame another?
               5. Whether doth any of your Pariſh, refuſe to pay vnto the Pariſh Clarke or Sexton ſuch wages as are vnto them due, and haue been accuſtomably paid?
            
            
               Touching Pariſhioners.
               WHether hath any in your Pariſh ſpoken againſt, or any way impugned the Kings Maieſties ſupremacie in cauſes Eccleſiaſticall, the Truth and Doctrine of the Church of England, the forme of Gods worſhip contained in the booke of common praier, and adminiſtration of the Sacraments?
               2. Whether hath any in your Pariſh ſpoken againſt or impugned the Articles of religion agreed vpon in An. 1602. the Rites, and ceremonies eſtabliſhed in the Church, the gouernment by Archbiſhops, Biſhops, Deanes, Archdeacons, and others that beare office in the ſame?
               
                  3. Whether haue any in your pariſh ſpoken againſt or impugned the forme of making and conſecrating Biſhops, Prieſts, or Deacons, or haue any ſeparared themſelues from the ſocietie of the congregation, and combined in a newe Brotherhood, or depraued the Synod lately held by the Kings authoritie?
               4. Whether hath any in your pariſh maintained or defended any ſuch Miniſters or Schoolemaſters as refuſe to ſubſcribe to the order of the Church, haue they affirmed that ſuch Miniſters, and their adherents may make rules and orders in cauſes Eccleſiaſticall, without the Kings authoritie?
               5. Whether doth any in your pariſh prophane, violate, or miſpend the Sabbath, or holy daie, or any part of them, vſing any offenſiue conuerſation, or worldly labour in thoſe dayes, or any of them?
               6. Whether hath any in your Pariſh in the time of diuine ſeruice couered his head, albeit he hath an infirmitie, in which caſe a cap or night-quoife is allowed, or is there any who hath not reuerently kneeled when the generall confeſſion, Letanie, and other prayers are read, and which haue not ſtood vp at the ſaying of the beleefe?
               7. Whether hath any in your Pariſh diſturbed the ſeruice or Sermon by walking, talking, or any other way, or departed out of the church during the ſeruice or Sermon without ſome vrgent cauſe, or loitered about the church or church porch?
               8. Whether doth all pariſhioners receiue the holy communion thriſe euery yeare at the leaſt, whereof the feaſt of Eaſter to be one, and haue all beeing of the age of 16. yeares, dulie receiued, or not?
               9. Whether hath any Parent beene vrged to be preſent or admitted to anſweare as Godfather for his owne childe, or hath any Godfather or Godmother made any other anſwer or ſpeech then is preſcribed by the Booke, or haue any beene admitted for ſuch at Baptiſme, who haue not firſt receiued the communion?
               10. Whether doe all Fathers, Mothers, maſters, miſtriſſes come, and cauſe their children, ſeruants, & apprentiſes to come duely to the church, and according to the miniſters direction to be inſtructed and catechiſed, or who be they that haue not obeyed the miniſter herein?
               11. Whether haue any perſons married together within the degrees of conſanguinitie or affinitie prohibited, ſet forth in a table, appointed to be placed in euery church, or haue any married or contracted themſelues vnder the age of 21. yeares, without the conſent of their Parents or Gouernours, if their Parents be dead?
               
                  12. Whether haue any perſons, once lawfully married, forſaken each other, or doe liue aſunder without the authoritie of the Ordinarie, or doe any beeing diuorſed or ſeparated, marrie againe, the former wife or husband yet liuing?
               13. Whether haue any beene married in the times wherein marriage is by law reſtrained, without lawfull licence, viz. from the Saturday next before Advent Sunday, vntill the Fourteenth of Ianuarie: and from the Saturday next before Septuageſima Sunday, vntill the Monday next after low Sunday: and from the Sunday before the Rogation weeke, vntil Trinitie Sunday?
               14. Whether hath any of your Pariſh vnreuerētly vſed your Miniſter, or haue any laid violent hands vpon him, or diſgraced his Office and calling, by word or deed?
               15 Whether haue you in your Pariſh any dweller or ſoiournour, a maintainer of Popiſh Doctrine, or ſuſpected to keepe ſciſmaticall books, or to fauour any hereſie or errour?
               16. Whether haue you any common reſorters to your Church, which are not of your pariſh, or doe any ſuch receiue the Communion amongſt you: what be their names, and of what pariſhes are they?
               17. Whether haue any in the time of ſeruice opened their ſhops, exerciſed their trade, vſed any gaming, beene in any Tauerne, or Alehouſe, or otherwiſe ill imployed?
               18. Whether are there in your pariſh any Adulterers, Fornicators, inceſtuous perſons, bawdes, receiuers, cloſe fauourers, conueyers away, or which ſuffer to depart any incontinent perſon vnpuniſhed, any blaſphemers, common ſwearers, drunkards, ribauds, vſurers, malitious ſlanderers, ſcolds, or ſowers of diſcord, or any defamed of the ſaid crimes?
               19. Whether doe any in your pariſh adminiſter the goods of the dead without authoritie, or ſuppreſſe their will or Teſtament, haue any Executors neglected to performe their Wills, eſpecially in paying of Legacies giuen to the church, to the poore, or to any other charitable, or godly vſes?
               20. Whether doe any refuſe to pay to the reparations, ornaments, and other things required in your church, as they are ceaſſed by a lawfull veſtrie, or any dwelling out of your Pariſh, which hold land in your Pariſh?
               21. Whether hath any perſon ſuſpended or excommunicated, beene ſuffred co heare diuine ſeruice, or the Sermon, to receiue the Sacraments,

to be maried or churched, or haue any Excommunicants beene buried in chriſtian buriall?
               22. Whether haue any in your Pariſh beene chriſtened, churched, buried, or receiued the communion, or been maried out of your church, both parties dwelling in your pariſh?
               23. Whether haue all women in your pariſh deliuered of child, come at conuenient time after to church to giue thanks, and haue they beene churched according to the forme of the Booke of common prayer?
               24. Whether hath the preambulation of the circuit of your Pariſh beene obſerued once euery yeare, if not, whoſe default is it?
               25. Whether haue any in your pariſh giuen the churchwardens, or ſidemen, or any of them euill words for doing their dutie, according to their oath and conſcience in making preſentment for any fault?
            
            
               Touching Churchwardens and Swornemen.
               WHether doe any in your Pariſh take vpon them to be churchwarden or ſide-man, which is not lawfully choſen by the Miniſter, & Pariſhioners according to the canon, or do any continue that office longer then one yeare, except they be choſen againe, and are all ſuch Officers choſen yearely in Eaſter weeke?
               2. Whether doe your churchwardens within one Moneth at the moſt after their yeare ended, before the Miniſter and Pariſhioners giue vp a iuſt account of all ſuch money, and other things, as they haue receiued and beſtowed, haue they deliuered all remaining in their hands belonging to their church or pariſh, by bill intended, to bee deliuered to the next church wardens?
               3. Whether haue the church-wardens with the adviſe of the the Miniſter, from time to time prouided a ſufficient quantitie of fine white bread and wholeſome wine for the number of communicants?
               4. Whether doe the church wardens and Swornemen, before euerie Viſitation, and at other times when there is iuſt occaſion, meete and conferre about their preſentments, and the anſwering of theſe Articles, and who hath (after notice giuen him of the time and place) careleſly abſented himſelfe?
               5. Whether the forfeiture of twelue pence for abſence from church, appointed by ſtatute for the vſe of the poore, be taken and leuied by the church-wardens, and employed according to the ſaid Statute: and whether is the ſame forfeiture taken of all perſons which ſtand wilfully ſuſpended or Excommunicated?
               6. Whether haue any churchwardens loſt, ſold or detained any 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
ornaments, Bels, Rents, or implements of the Church?
               7. Whether doe you the Churchwardens and Sideſmen about the middeſt of Diuine Seruice, vſually walke out of the Church, and ſee who are abroad in any alehouſe, or elſewhere abſent, or euill employed, and haue you preſented all ſuch to the Ordinarie?
               8. Whether doe you know, or haue heard a fame of any offence, cō
                  mitted, or dutie omitted by any of your Pariſh before your time, and heretofore not preſented to the Ordinarie, or as yet not reformed, and haue you preſented the ſame?
               9. Finally, doe you know of any matter or cauſe which is a breach of the lawes Eccleſiaſticall here not expreſſed, and haue you preſented the ſame?
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   