
      
         
            
            
            A table inſtructiue whan and how a man cōnyngly let bloude of all the neceſſary veynes of mans body very profitable for all Chirurgeons and Barbers.
            
               A 
               THE vaynes of the foreheade and the tempels do ſyrynge and growe of the exteriall throte vaynes lyke as braunches, y• which muſt be opened drawyng the launcer ouerthwart the vayne, I call it lettynge ouerthwart the vayne accordynge to auncient doctours the which is not fully alonge the vayne: nor fully ouerthwart the veyne, but kepeth a meane betwene both. And the lettynge of this vayn is good for apoſtems in the eyen, and the migrain, and for great headache, and for alteration of the wytte, for the frenſy, and for the newe lepre.
            
               B The veynes of the necke that communelye are called the vaynes Guiden or
                  •
                
               iugulares exteriores muſt be opened ouerthwart the veyne, lettynge the launcer declyne a lytle a longe the veyne but not to muche: or els it ſhuld be harde to ſtaunche the bloude. And he that wyll open thys vayne well, muſt cauſe the pacient to bowe his heade from that ſyde where he wyll open the vayne, that ſhe maye be bent. And this vayne muſt be opened (as ſayth Auicen) wt a launcer cum pilo, that is to ſaye, that hath a pyn ouerthwart about the ende of the laūcer, to kepe it for goyng to depe in the veyne. And the lettinge of theſe veynes is good for the humors of the head, for the rewme and the migrain. And it is to be noted that all the veynes of the head ought to be let after a man hath eaten, nother ought theſe veynes to be let in thoſe, in whome is requyred the power to engender, for (as ſayeth Auicen) through theſe veynes are voyded the ſprites yt nature doth ſend forth for generatiō.
            
               C The veyne on the out ſyde of the arme the whiche the new practiſers communly do call Cephalica, & Galen vena externa and alſo Humeralis, taketh his originall with the Guiden or iugulares exteriores from the holowe veyne. And this veyne Cephalica muſt be opened with a greater hole then the other veyns, or els (as ſayeth Haly abbas the auncient phiſition in the fourth boke of his practyſe) y• fore ſayd veyne is daungerous to fall to an apoſtemation. And greate hede muſt be taken for faylynge in openynge this veyn, for ſhe is yeopardous to let. For yf ye dare not touch this veyne Cephalyke, and ſhrugge to open it (as ſome barbers or Chirurgens that be not wel expert do) ye ſhall do great harme to the patient and cauſe daunger of apoſtumation. Alwayes yf ye touch this veyne well at the firſt launcyng, ſhe is the ſame that of al veynes doth greue leſſe in lettynge of bloúde: howe be it what ſo euer ye do make the hole metely greate. The openinge of this veyne is good for runnynge of the eyen, and all maner of headeache, and for the fallynge ſyckneſſe.
            
               D The veyne that appeareth in the mydde of the arme before the bowynge of it, or after the bowynge, the whiche communely is called the Median or Mediana, or Nigra after Auicen, or after Haly abbas Mediaſtina, and after Rhaſis ad Almanſorem ſhe is called vena matrix or Cardi ata: hath hyr originall or ſprynge partly of the Cephalica, and partly of the Baſilica, y• whiche muſt be opened ouerthwart the veyne or at the leeſt declinyng the laūcer a lytel awrye: without one wyll lett twyſe: and the lettynge bloud in this veyne, is good for all grefes & diſeaſes of the members, ſtomacke, rybbes and ſydes: for ſhe is the fountayne of all the body.
            
               E The veyne that cōmunely is called the Baſilica, and after Galen, uena interna / ſomtyme ſhe is called lecoraria other do call her Hexatica or Regia. Rhaſis (bycauſe ſhe doth go thorowe the arme holes) doth call her vena axillaris, and ſhe doth procede and come from the holowe veyne, beynge yet in the breſt before ſhe hath furnyſhed the interior

                  A figure for neceſsary lettyng off blounde.
                  A
                  B
                  C
                  D
                  E
                  F
                  G
                  H
                  I
                  J
                  K
               
iugulares or throte veynes. Hyr originall or ſprynge is of the ſtomacke, liuer and harte, and hyr beſt perceauer is in the out ſyde of the arme. Of the which veyne he that ſhall open her, ought to take diligently hede for launcyng: For harde by her is a greate ſynowe lyke vnto a veyne, wherin the ſprite of lyfe runneth vp and downe, & is mixte with blonde, the which yf it be opened, the pacient ſtandeth in yeopardy of his lyfe, as Galen doth ſaye in his boke of lettynge of bloud. Vnder the ſame Baſilica are alſo great ſynewes touchynge the foreſayde veyne: Therfore ſayth Rhaſis in his. xxviii. boke: Eſchue the Baſilica as muche as is poſſible, without it be for great nede: otherwyſe it is better to take the Median.
            
               F The veyne that appeareth about the toppe of the pulſe is the braunche or twygge of the Cephalica.
            
            
               G The ſeconde veyne that lyghtely appeareth about the myddelmoſte fynger, & is cōmunely called Funis brachij, is alſo a braunche or twygge of the Cephalica.
            
            
               H The thyrde veyne of the hande the whiche appeareth about the lyttell fynger, & is cōmunely called of the Phiſicians or Chirurgians Saluatella or vena titillaris or Aſcellaris, is alſo a braunche of the Baſilica. The whiche veynes of the hand as alſo other outwarde veynes, are of ſmall value or profite to be let or opened: becauſe they neuer yelde much bloude. And theſe muſte be opened as thoſe of the fete, namely in warme water, to cauſe the veynes to ſwell aboue the ſenowes.
            
               I The veyne of the inner ankle of the foote, the which appeareth more perfectely than the other, is cōmunely called Saphena, and commeth (as doth alſo the Sciatica) from the great holowneſſe that is vnder the knee.
            
               K The other veyne that is on the outſyde of the foote, is called Sciatica, and commeth likewyſe of the great holowneſſe vnder the knee. And the lettynge of theſe two veynes is good for all maner of ſwellynges and apoſtems of the preuy members. The which veynes of the feete are yeopardous for depe launcyng, and ſpecially the Sciatica, which is more fearefull to be touched then the Saphena. For yf ye open the Sciatica and launche to depe, for feare of faylynge, becauſe they appeare ſo ſmall: ye ſhal hardly eſcape, but that ye ſhall touche ſome ſenowe adioynynge to the ſame veynes, whereof might come great payne & other euil accidentes: As we haue ſene otherwhyles that for ignoraunce of the barbars and Surgeons, the pacient dyd fall into diuerſe greefes of the ſenowes or the crampe. This and ſuch lyke grefes therfore are yt cauſes why it is nedefull to bath the hande and feete in warme water whan they ſhall be launched, to cauſe them to ſwell and appeare the better: for they be lytle of them ſelues, and in geuynge them a cut with the launcer, ye muſt always beware of the ſe
                  •••
               es. Alſo the Sciatica muſt be launched as y• 
               Saphena, namely: a lytle ouerthwart, ſeynge they appeare ynough. And generally euery veyne that is in a place full of ſenowes or betwene ſenowes muſt be opened alonge the vayne, and that for two reaſons: The fyrſte is to eſcheue the ſenowes 
                  ••
                what place ſo euer they be. The ſecōd is that y• vayne, that is cut or blemiſhed alonge the veyne, is not ſo daungerous for the crampe or other euyl accidentes (as ſayth Galen in his. v. boke of Methodus Therapentice) as whan ſhe is launched alonge or a lytle ouerthwart.
            ¶ Behold gentle reader theſe are the veynes y• are cōmunly in vre to be letten. There are many other veynes that maye be cut or let for diuerſe grefes and diſeaſes, but becauſe they are not or lytle in vſe: and alſo becauſe Galen & other auncient Grekes haue made no mention of lettynge of them in theyr writynges: therfore let this lytle frutefull table ſuffiſe the at this tyme, by the which thou mayſt exerciſe and teache the ſelfe lyghtely and without daunger of any euyll accidentes to let any vayne of mans body.
            ¶ God ſaue the kynge.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprynted at London in Alderſgate ſtrete by Ihon̄ Herforde.
         
      
   