
      
         
            
            
            ¶ The Shape of, ii, Mōſters. M.D.Lxij
            
               pig monsters
            
            THis preſent yere of oure Lord God a thouſande fiue hundred thre ſcore and
two, one Marke Finkle a Ioiner dwelling beſide Charing croſſe by Weſtminſter
had a Sow that brought forth one Pigge onely, vpon the ſeuenth of Maye beinge Aſcention daye, the whiche Pigge had a head muche lyke vnto a Dolphines head with the left eare ſtanding vp forked like as ye ſee in this picture aboue, and the right eare being like as it were halfe a litle leafe being deuided in the middes ſharpe toward thend lying downward flat to the head without any holes into the headward. The two fore feet, like vnto handes, eche hande hauinge thre long fingers and a thumbe, bothe the thumbes growinge on the out ſides of the handes, the hinder legges growing very much backwarde otherwiſe then the common natural forme hath ben ſeen, beeing of no good ſhape, but ſmaller frō the body to the middle Ioint then they be from the ſame Ioint toward the foot. And the taile growing an Inche neare vnto the back then it doth of any that is of right ſhape. Theſe ſtraunge ſights, the Allmighty God ſendeth vnto vs that we ſhould not be forgetfull of his mighty power: nor vnthankful for his ſo greate mercies. The which hee ſheweth ſpecially by geuing vnto vs his holy word wherby our liues ought to be guided and alſo his wonderful tokens wherby we are moſt gentilly warned.
            But if we will not be warned, neither by his word, nor yet by his wonderful workes:
then let vs be aſſured that theſe ſtraunge monſtruous ſightes doe premonſtrate vnto vs that his heauy indignacion wyl ſhortly come vpon vs for our monſtruous lyuinge. Wherfore let vs earneſtly pray vnto God that he wyl geue vs grace earneſtly to repent our wickednes, faithfully to beleue his word: and ſincerely to frame our liues after the doctrine of the ſame,
            
               ¶ An Admonition vnto the Reader.
               
                  
                     LEt vs knowe by theſe vgly ſights,
                  and eke conſider well:
                  That our God is the Lord of mights,
                  who rules both heauen and hell.
               
               
                  By whoſe ſtrong hand theſe monſters here,
                  were formed as ye ſee:
                  That it mighte to the world appers,
                  almightie him to bee.
               
               
                  VVho might alſo vs men haue formde,
                  after a ſtraunge deuiſe:
                  As by the Childe of late deformde,
                  appeareth in plaine wiſe.
               
               
                  what might theſe monſters to vs teache?
                  which now are ſent ſo rife:
                  But that we haue Goddes wurd well preacht,
                  and will not mend our life.
               
               
                  At which ſtraunge ſightes we meruel muche,
                  when that we doe them ſee:
                  Yet can there not be found one ſuche,
                  That ſo will warned bee.
               
               
                  And loke what great deformitie,
                  In bodies ye beholde:
                  Much more is in our mindes truly,
                  an hundreth thouſand folde.
               
               
                  So that we haue great cauſe in deede,
                  Our ſinnes for to confeſſe:
                  And eke to call to God with ſpeede,
                  The ſame for to redreſſe.
               
               
                  VVhich if we wyl not fayle to doo,
                  and purely to repent:
                  He wyl no doubt, vs comfort ſo,
                  as ſhal our ſoules contente.
               
               
                  Now ſith our God ſo louing is,
                  and ready to forgeue:
                  VVhy doe we not abhorre all vice,
                  and only to him cleaue.
               
               
                  Sith he alſo his hande can ſhake,
                  And ſone deſtroy vs all,
                  Why doe we not then feare and quake,
                  And downe before him fall.
               
               
                  VVhy doe we not amend I ſaye,
                  Either for loue or feare:
                  why driue we of from day to daye,
                  And ſinning not forbeare.
               
               
                  Good lawes of lats renewde wee ſee,
                  Much ſinne for to ſuppreſſe:
                  God graunt that they fulfilde maye bee,
                  To ouerthrow exceſſe.
               
               
                  O Lord graunt vs alſo thy grace,
                  That by repentance pure:
                  In heauen to haue a dwelling place,
                  For euer to endure.
               
            
            Amen.
            ꝙ. W. F.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London at the Long Shop in the Pultry by Iohn Alde
         
      
   