
      
         
            
            
            
            
            ¶ An Aſtrological Diſcourſe vpon the great and notable Coniunction of the tvvo ſuperiour Planets, SATVRNE & IVPITER, which ſhall happen the 28. day of April, 1583.
            With a briefe Declaration of the effectes, which the late Eclipſe of the Sunne 1582. is yet heerafter to woorke.
            Written newly by RICHARD HARVEY: partely, to ſupplie that is wanting in cōmon Prognoſtications: and partely by praediction of miſchiefes enſuing, either to breed ſome endeuour of preuention by foreſight, ſo farre as lyeth in vs: or at leaſtwiſe, to arme vs with pacience beforehande.
            
               Seene and allowed.
            
            
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   C
                     •
                  ARISS
                     ••
                  M ET GRATISSIMUS 
                     •
                  IN
                     •
                  VIVS 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
            
            
               AT LONDON: Imprinted by Henrie Bynneman. Anno Domini. 1583.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, IOHN, BISHOP OF London, and his verie good Lord: RICHARD HARVEY wiſheth long life, with increaſe of all honourable vertues.
            
            
               RIGHT REVEREND, my dutie in moſt humble wiſe remembred, I am to beſeech your good Lordſhippe, to vouchſafe me that fauour, (if not for mine owne ſake, or the worthines of the thing it ſelfe, yet for Cambridge ſake, and that eſpeciall affection, whiche you haue alwayes borne towards Vniuerſitie men, and namely your ſingular curteſie toward my brother Gabriel, when he ſhould haue trauailed to Smalcaldie, which curteſie he doth often recogniſe) that as it hath pleaſed you alreadie to commit the peruſing of the Aſtrologicall Diſcourſe following, to your moſt learned ſonne in lawe, M. Doctor Squire, who can verie well iudge, and hath verie friendly allowed thereof: ſo it may now like your Lordſhippe, to admit of the ſame for the beſt New yeares gift, that

ſuch a ſcholler on ſuch a ſuddaine can beſtow. Which albeit in reſpect of the baſe handling, it be nothing worthie either the view, or the handling of ſuch a perſonage, as I can not but know your Lordſhip to be: yet conſidering the great importance, and conſequence of the argument, I am both perſwaded by ſome friends, who are to ouerrule me in a greater matter, to aduenture the publication thereof, (inſomuch that I haue made my good Lord of Rocheſter, and M. Doctor Lewen priuie thereunto, who like well of the impreſsion) and with all am incouraged to craue your good leaue, that vpon your priuate liking, (which notwithſtanding my ſelfe of my ſelfe can not greatly hope for) you would ſuffer it to paſſe vnder the title of your good Lorſhippes publique maintenaunce, and patronage. I may eaſily preſume too much of your accuſtomed fauour, ſo aſſuredly knowen as well in both the Vniuerſities, as abroad in your Lordſhips Dioceſſe, and other parts of the Realme: and therefore (notwithſtanding the importunitie of thoſe my friends, and the grauitie of the argument it ſelfe) being loth to be ouerbold, where I owe ſo much reuerence and dutie, I haue thought good, not to vſe your name without your owne licence, but wholy to commit the publiſhing, or ſuppreſsing of this Diſcourſe to your Lordſhippes liking or diſliking. You may haply maruell what I meane, either to deale my ſelfe in any ſuch matter of Aſtrologie being ſhortly to profeſſe Diuinity, (ſo ſoone as my place in the College ſhall call me thereunto) or to dedicate a Treatiſe of anie ſuch contents vnto one, that hath both ſo many yeres, euen in King Edwards, & Queene Maries daies, (as appeareth by his owne, and others writings) caried ſo ſingular credit for his knowledge, and practiſe in Diuinitie, & now by Gods prouidence is in place, to benefit and countenance thoſe, that being admitted to that vocation, ſhall deſerue to be well accepted therein. But for the one, beſides that I might alleage for my defence,

the examples of Melancthon, Chytraeus, Iunctinus, Maeſtlyne, our M. Doctor Fulke, your M. Doctor Squier, and ſome other of like credit: who being profeſſed in Diuinitie to their owne ſpeciall commendation, & the generall benefite of the Church, were not afterward aſhamed both to defend, & to practice Aſtrologie: the verie ſubiect and matter of the Arte it ſelfe is ſuch, that none, which knoweth it in deede, can iuſtly charge it with the leaſt contrarietie or repugnancie either to Diuinitie it ſelfe, or to the ſoundeſt partes of Morall and Naturall Philoſophie. Coeli enarrant gloriam Dei; and Platoes opinion is, that our eies were principally giuen vs, for this vſe and end, to be occupied in the contemplation of the heauens; whereunto he attributeth ſo much, that he thinketh Aſtronomie and wiſedom to be ſo inſeparably linked and chained togither, that neither a very wiſe man can want Aſtrologie, nor a very good Aſtrologer want wiſdom. To which effect, that notable ſaying of his, deſerueth to be as famous, as your Lordſhip knoweth it to be amongeſt the learned: 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Which verie ſaying ſeemeth vnto me to import ſome part of that Diuinitie, whereof ſo many ages he hath caried ſo high, and honourable a ſurname: the rather becauſe the ſingular and incomparable wiſedom of Salomon, as your Lordſhippe beſt remembreth, is thus particularly deſcribed, in the booke intituled, Liber Sapientiae. Deus mihi dedit harum rerum cognitionem veram, vt ſciam diſpoſitionem orbis terrarum, & virtutes, effectioneſque elementorum, initium, & finem, & medium temporum, ſolstitiorum viciſſitudines, & conſummationes temporum, & morum mutationes, annorum orbes, & ſtellarum ſitus, ac diſpoſitiones, & naturas animalium, & iras bestiarum, & ventorum impecus, & cogitationes hominum, & ſtirpium differentias, & radicum virtutes: & quaecunque ſunt abſcondita, & improuiſae didici, cum me omnium Artifex docuit Sapientia. For which verie kindes of knowledge, (albeit I beleue neuer anie

had them in that full meaſure, that it pleaſed God to beſtow vpon Salomon) our chiefeſt Aſtrologers, eſpeciallie the moſt learned Arabians, ſo often as they are occaſioned to cite, or mention any of their predeceſſors: call them commonlie by the name of Sapientes, which ſome I know merrily tranſlated Wizardes, but how wizardly, (if they ſpeake generally without exception of the better ſort) let the prouerbe teſtifie, which ſaith, Scientia non habet inimicum, niſi ignorantem. What ſhould I ſpeake of Thales Mileſius, who being the firſt, that among the Graecians was called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , as Diogenes Laertius reporteth▪ was alſo the firſt among them, that ſearching out the ſecrecies, and miſteries of Aſtrologie: both foretold the conuerſions, and eclipſes of the Sunne, as Eudemus witneſſeth in his Aſtrologicall hiſtorie, and found out Vrſa minor with hir litle ſtarres, whereby the Phoenices direct their nauigation, as Callimachus teſtifieth in his Greeke verſes: and foreſeeing a verie great dearth of oliues, and thereupon purpoſing to ſhewe, howe eaſie a matter it was for Philoſophers to grow rich, gat into his hands by a reaſonable price, all the oliue gardens in Miletum, and Chium, the winter before, whereby afterward making his owne price at his pleaſure, he gained exceeding great ſummes of money: as is crediblie recorded not only by Hieronimus Rhodius, and Ariſtotle in Greeke, but alſo by Tullie De Diuinatione, and diuers other in Latine: Ariſtotle ſaying, one while he did it, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , an other while, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : and Solon the wiſe Lawmaker among the Athenians, following his aduiſe, ſet downe certaine Aſtrologicall obſeruations of the Aequinoctia, and corrected the Attique yeare, as appeareth by manie hiſtories: and finally by the defects of the Moone and Sunne, he prognoſticated the defects and ſubuerſions of certaine ſtates and kingdoms in Aſia, as out of Plinies Naturall hiſtorie, I haue ſpecially noted in my briefe Treatiſe of the late eclipſe. I ſhould be

ouer tedious vnto your Lordſhip, if I ſhould go about to recite the tenth part of thoſe teſtimonies, and auctorities, which I coulde eaſilie alleage to the ſame effect: whereby it is certainlie euident, that as wiſe, and worthie men, as euer were in the world, both made verie ſpeciall account of this ſtudie in other, and trauailed exceedingly therein them ſelues: as namely Iulius Caeſar, Octauius Auguſtus, Ptolomey, Theodoſius, one of the beſt Emperours, Fredericke the ſecond, (who cauſed Ptolomey, Meſſahalah, and diuers other principall Aſtrologers, to be tranſlated out of the Arabian into Latine: Hos quia conſilijs regum conducere ſenſit: as Hellerus writeth to Erneſtus, Prince of Hennenberg:) Alphonſus the moſt excellent King of Arragonia, and Naples: Matthias Coruinus of Hungarie: Charles the fift of famous memorie, and ſundrie other, as well Princes, as ſubiectes of the moſt notable ſort. But I can not praetermit that Aſtrologicall conference betwene Caeſar, and the Aegyptian Prieſt in Lucans Pharſalia, where Caeſars owne confeſsion of him ſelfe is thus deliuered: media inter praelia ſemper, ſtellarum, coelique plagis, ſuperiſque vacaui: Eudoxi Fastos noster ſuperabit & Annus. Which he in deede performed, correcting and reforming the Romane yeare by the helpe of Soſigenes, as Solon did the Attique yeare by the helpe of Thales: an other maner of reformation, than that of the Calender, which the Pope Gregorie the xiij. hath newly publiſhed, by the helpe of I knowe not what Aſtrologers. As for the reſt, leaſt I ſhould ſeme to forget my ſelfe, in not hauing that regard to your Lordſhips perſon, which I ought, wil reſerue their Aſtrologicall commendations vnto ſome fitter place, thinking it ſufficient for this preſent, to ſtande vpon the Reaſons, which Melancthon, a man as your Lordſhip beſt knoweth, of a ſharpe, and ſounde iudgement in moſt ſchollerly points of learning, alleageth, in a notable preface of his, In Theoricas nouas planetarum
               
Georgij Purbachij directed to his moſt learned countriman, Simon Grynaeus: wherein he ſheweth how needefull Iudiciall Aſtrologie is, both for priuate vſes, and for publike. For priuate vſes, firſt in medendo: then, ad regendos mores: thirdly, ad deligenda ſtudia: plurimum enim refert intelligere, quo quemque natura ducat: (I vſe not a word, but his owne:) beſide, fortuna ſaepe comitatur mores: & quanquam aliae quoque cauſae funt humanorum euentuum, tamen res loquitur ipſa, interdum in Astris cauſara eſſe, cur vt Heſiodus inquit: ipſe dies quandoque parens, quandoque nouerca, ſit. Fiftly, conducit tempestatum obſeruatio ad Oeconomiam: laſt of all, hi proximi anni aliquot ſatis claras ſignificationes praebuerunt, ſidera magnam vim in aere, & rebus naſcentibus habere, idque palam testantur inſignes ſiderum congreſſus (which maketh directly for the preſent Diſcourſe.) And as for the publike vſe and neceſsitie thereof, he goeth forwarde thus, in my ſimple opinion, both very politickely and diuinely: Existunt & inrebus publicis fatales tempestates, in quibus admoniti ab hac arte, multa prouidere poſſunt, vel ad cauenda, vel ad mitiganda pericula. Saepe enim fata conſilio in melius flecti queunt, ſaepe fatorum ſaeuitiam lenit Deus, placatus piorum votis. Quare haec quoque grauis cauſa fuerit, rerum futurarum ſignificationes animaduertendi. He addeth for reaſon. Prodest enim commonefieri homines atrocibus ſiderum minis, vt à Deo opem implorent; deinde, vt bonitatem Dei magis agnoſcant, cum viderint aliquam eſſe ſuperiorem ac meliorem naturam ſideribus, quae tristes ſignificationes mitigat. To the breeding of which politike, and diuine conſiderations in the mindes of ſome or other, I would to God, this ſlender Diſcourſe of mine might be anie meanes. Melancthon leaueth not thus, but ſtill goeth on, as it were in a certaine feruent zeale towards this profeſsion. Nec dubia est harum Artium fides: nam & motuum ratio demonstrationes habet, quarum eò est ſuauiſſima cognitio, quia delectat animos certitudo, & harmonia,

ſeu conſenſus in tanta varietate argumentorium: & Diuinatricem ſi quis prudenter ad Phyſicen referet, intelliget eam habere graues cauſas; & tuetur eam experientia peritiſſimorum hominum: rectè verò Galenus de hac ipſa arte inquit: Sophisticum eſſe, contra experientiae testimonium, rationes quaerere. Finally, to aunſwere common obiections, and ſuche ordinarie contradictions, as Aſtrologers eares are well acquainted withall, he at laſt breefely decideth, and determineth all ſuch doubtes in the wordes following. Nec eo detrahenda est arti fides, quia aut artifices aliqui inepti ſunt, aut non omnes euentus humani in arte monstrantur: ſunt enim & aliae quaedam praeter ſidera, euentuum cauſae. Etſi autem in tantis tenebris humanae mentis, multa proſpici nequeunt, tamen ariis beneficium non leue ducendum est, quae pleraque interim; & ad vitae ſummam pertinentia monet. Quoties fallimur in leuioribus artibus, & in ijs rebus, quae ſunt, vt ita dicam, in manibus? Neque tamen propter eiuſmodi errata explodandae ſunt artes; ſed prudentia est, ad vitae vſum inde, quantum poſſumus, transferre. His reſolution and concluſion there is. Illud etiam rectè institutis iudicare facile est, quis eſſe modus Diuinationum debeat, & quòd religio approbet has Diuinationes, vt Medicorum iudicia, aut caeteras Phyſicae partes. Which reaſons of Melancthon, I doubt not but your Lordſhip will admit, and allow for effectually materiall and good. Now I ſee not greatly, what remaineth to be yet obiected: vnleſſe haply ſome will oppoſe the olde decrees of the Romane Senate, and ſome newer imperiall lawes, againſt all ſuch, as were vulgarly called Mathematici, Chaldaei, Arioli, and Diuinatores, of whome Vlpian the famous lawyer treateth libro 7. de officio Proconſulis, vnder the title, De Mathematicis, & Vaticinatoribus: Which verie title I haue hearde ſo alleaged. Whereunto, firſt I might aunſwere, that they diſpute not ad idem: thoſe lawes being made only againſt ſuch, as Moyſes condemneth in the XVIII. of

Deuteronomie, who vainly tooke vpon them, to diuine by magicall and ſuperſtitious ſorceries, numbers, lottes, characters, charmes, interrogatories propounded to the dead, inſpections of birds, entrals of beaſtes, and ſuch other monſtrous, and abhominable meanes: for ſo ſaith A. Gellius in his firſt booke of his Noctes Atticae: vulgus quos gentilitio vocabulo Chaldaeos dicere oportet, eos Mathematicos vocat; & Seruius Honoratus vpon the fourth of Virgils Aeneidos: Cum multa ſacra Romani ſuſciperent, ſemper magica damnarunt; probroſa enim ars habita est. Secondly, that albeit thoſe Romane lawes had in deede bene deuiſed as well againſt their Aſtrologers then, as againſt anie other Diuiners or Soothſayers: what reaſon is there, they ſhould make more againſt ours now, than the like lawes make againſt our Rhetoricians, Philoſophers, Phiſitians, and in a maner againſt all other profeſſours of anie liberall arte? All ſuch being by one Romane decree or other, at one time, or other, vpon one ſuddaine occaſion, or other, baniſhed the citie, as troubleſome, and needeleſſe perſons, in a politike and martiall ſtate, ſo long as the rage of that tempeſt endured. Thirdly, admit their Aſtrological diuinations were lawfully forbidden, being found commonly deceitfull and falſe, by reaſon that the art it ſelfe was then verie vnperfect, and vncertaine, as it continued to the age of Ptolomey, who floriſhed but in the time of the Emperour Antoninus Pius, which ſucceeded Traian and Adrian: yet may ours neuertheleſſe lawfully ſtand, the art being nowe generallie of the moſt and beſt acknowledged to be much more perfectly reformed, and a right art in deede: or if that ſeeme more, a right ſcience in deede. For which two laſt reaſons, I am to thanke a late conference, that I had with my brother Gabriel, about Hallowmas laſt, touching the validitie of thoſe Romane lawes. As for other later lawes, & ſtatuts, either forreine, or our owne, I know not anie that vniuerſally and ſimplie condemne Aſtrologie:

and as for thoſe, that condemne ſome particular abuſe thereof, I muſt needes confeſſe, they are verie wiſe, and neceſſarie ordinaunces, to meete with the lewde practiſes, and impoſtures of manie, that vnder the pretence of their figure commit intolerable villanies, wherein for my parte, I doubt not, but they deſerue the penalties, inflicted vpon them by law, thinking them worthily puniſhed, Pro menſura conſultationis, as Vlpian ſpeaketh of his Mathematici in the forenamed title, with this addition of his, following immediatly after in the ſame place: qui de principis ſalute, capite puniantur, vel qua alia grauiore paenae afficiantur: extending withall the force of the law in that point, euen to the puniſhment of other ſimple wizardes: Qui contra quietem, imperiumque populi Romani, improbandas artes exercent: and finally alleaging the example of the Emperour Marcus, Qui in Syrum inſulam eum relegauit, qui motu Caſſiano vaticinatus erat, & multa quaſi inſtinctu Deorum dixerat: Neither dare I excuſe either Thraſillus, or Aſcletarion, or Gauricus: whereof the firſt foretold the deſtruction of Tiberius the Emperour: the ſecond of Domitian: the third of the Bentiuoli in Bononia: or the Prieſt, that gaue out the rumour of the future murthering of Galeacius Sfortia, Duke of Millaine, (who were all worthily rewarded for their folly) or anie other, that by their Horoſcopicall predictions might ſeeme to harten, & haſten one conſpirators, to the atchieuing, or attempting of their Princes death, but in that caſe would wiſh all Aſtrologers, either not to deale at all, or elſe to deale priuately and priuily with the Prince him ſelfe: & then too, to hold Cardanes rule, ſet downe amongſt eight other like conditions, in the end of his booke, De Astrologicie interrogationibus: principi ne magnum malum firmiter vnquam praedixeris, ſed periculum: howbeit Cardane him ſelfe dealt more plainly, and therefore more daungerouſly with our King Edward the VI. as appeareth in the Iudicials of his natiuitie, giuen out in the beginning of his

               Duodecim illustres geniturae. At mihi, ex innata ſinceritate, & quod miſerum adoleſcentuium amarem, ſortiſque eius miſererer (quoth Cardane there) certum erat, etiam cum manifesto vitae diſcrimine, omnia patefacere; quamuis futurum crederem, vt me irriderent. But what followeth? Ergo volentibus fatis, nec ſingularis hu
                     ••
                  s artis cognitio prodeſſe regi potuit: nec bonitas, atque ſimplicitas ingenij, mihi obeſſe. Which good ſucceſſe of Cardane, was partly to be attributed to his owne diſcreete handling, free from all maner of ſuſpition, but ſpecially to the innocent, and ſingular good nature of that moſt noble young King, who accepted ſo fauourably of his affectionate intention. But, neither this ſpeciall priuiledge of his being withall a ſtraunger of extraordinarie credit, nor anie like perſonall example can warrant other priuate men, to intermeddle in like ſorte in the natiuities, and deſtinies of their Princes, otherwiſe than is before limited, or vpon the Princes owne direct commaundement. And yet if either this way, or any like, the art happen by ſome buſie, and fonde fellowes to be abuſed, it hath but the ſame fortune, that all other artes and ſciences haue beſide: & the Lawiers rule, Abuſus non tollit vſum, will ſtill iuſtifie the right, and commendable practice thereof. The bounds of which limitation, I hauing no way exceeded in anie parte of the Diſcourſe following: I hope, there is nothing therin contained, which, conſidering the premiſes, might not proceede, euen from one, that were already profeſſed in Diuinitie. And, then I truſt, in reſpect of the matter, I haue committed no inconuenience, in recommending the ſame to the fauour and patronage of ſuch a Diuine, as all England knoweth your Lordſhip to be: who I doubt not, can iudge exactly thereof. For the maner, I am humbly to craue pardon, being neither practiſed in writing Engliſh, nor purpoſing anie ſuch publike dedication at the firſt. It may peraduenture be an occaſion, that hereafter I ſhall acquaint my pen better with enditing in our owne tonge. In the meane

time, I am to beſeech your Reuerend Lordſhippe, to reſpect rather what is here ſaid, than how it is ſaid: preſuming that I haue litle erred in my iudicials, whatſoeuer defects may chaunce to appeare in the ſtyle. And yet for the verie conſequence of the matter too, I muſt ſay with Tullie, Optanda quidem optima: expectanda deterrima: ferenda quaecunque erunt. How Gods omnipotencie ouerruleth all cauſes, and effects, as well particularly in ſpecie, & indiuiduo, as vniuerſally in genere, I haue ſufficiently vttered as it were by the way in other places: our laſt remedie is Chriſtian pacience, if there be no other remedie. But that is a Theologicall argument, worthie your Lordſhips handling: and I ſee I haue already preſumed ouermuch of your Lordſhippes pacience, in being thus troubleſome, and tedious vnto you, beyonde the compaſſe of an ordinarie Epiſtle, or Preface. Which neuertheleſſe I durſt in no reſpect haue done, but vpon certaine aſſurance of that fauourable acceptation, which from time to time, it hath pleaſed you to vouchſafe the like writings of diuers Vniuerſitie men, being litle paſt my ſtanding there, and namely my brothers Anticoſmopolita, when he was not much aboue the ſame continuaunce. In full hope, and affiance whereof, I will here moſt humbly take my leaue, committing your Lordſhip to the protection of God, who giue you many proſperous Newyeares, and long preſerue you, to his owne glorie, and the benefit of his Church. Here in London this 23. of Ianuarie. 1583.
            
               Your good Lordſhippes most humble, RICHARD HARVEY.
               
            
         
         
            
            T. S. Ogdoas in R. H. Prognoſticon.
            
               CEdite Francitali, florenti cedite vati,
            Harueius meruit nomen habere Sophi.
            Spirat in ore Furor, Baccho
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                & Apolline dignus,
            Palladis vt noſcas Mercurij
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                genus.
            Ergò agite Anglorum proceres, legitote Prophetā,
            Memphiticis ſimilem, nobilibuſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                Magis.
            Vade Liber, liberi ingenij, genij
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                beati
            Inſigne, & Patriae pulpita ſcande tuae.
         
         
            
            Coeli ſchema ſub Coniunctione Saturni & Iouis.
            
               
                  sky map
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            To my verie good, and moſt louing Brother, Maſter Gabriel Haruey, at his chamber in Trinitie Hall.
            
               GOod Brother, I haue in ſome part done my endeuour to ſatiſfie your late requeſte, wherein you aduertiſe mée either not ſo much to addict my ſelfe to the ſtudie, and contemplation of Iudiciall Aſtrologie, or elſe by ſome euident and ſenſible demonſtration, to make certaine and infallible proofe what general good I can do my countrie thereby, or what ſpeciall fruite I can reape thereof vnto my ſelfe. I confeſſe greater wittes can work greater matters: and mine owne principall ſtudie as yet, is but Philoſophie and Phiſick, wherein I pray God I may ſpéedily growe to any reaſonable mediocritie, that I maye the

ſooner procéed to my final Profeſſion: But ſeing it is your deſire to practiſe me, & as it were to oppoſe mée in this kinde: you ſhall heare, what I can briefly ſay touching the great Cō
               iunction of Saturne and Iupiter, the next yéere immediately following. I am to ſubmit my opinion to the cenſure and correction of thoſe, that are longer ſtudied, and more profoundly ſeen in this facultie: but that you may not conceiue, I haue altogither miſpent my time this way, I wil endeuour my ſelfe to make proofe in ſome ſorte, how I haue profited in the ſtudie. Your ſelfe haue often willed mée to goe roundly to the matter, withoute eyther glorious inſinuations by way of Preface, or pleaſurable and conceited flooriſhes by waye of digreſſion: and therefore I preſume you wil not blame mée, though I take a direct and plaine courſe in the diſcourſe following. Firſt, that Iudiciall Aſtrologie is neither any vaine and idle ſtudie, nor forbydden and vnlawful Arte, your ſelf hauing long ſince, taken ſome reaſonable paines therein, and béeing able to ſay ſo much in the defence thereof, out of many olde and new hiſtories of approued authoritie and credit, can ſufficiently (I know) and wil readilie (I think) teſtifie. The ſlight arguments of Picus Mirandula, Cornelius Agrippa, and

diuers other to ye cōtrary, haue béen throughly anſwered, by Balantius, Schonerus, Melanctō, Cardane, & ſundry other, but ſpecially of late by Iunctinus, who in his confutatiō procéedeth compendiouſly, and directly from argument to argument, leauing in a manner nothing vntouched, that hath béene, or can bée obiected in diſgrace of this knowledge. And if the autorities of men, that haue giuen them ſelues that way, make any thing for the purpoſe, what goodlyer wits in ye worlde, than ſome in euery cuntrie, that haue made ſpecial accoūt, & beſtowed much trauel in this diuine ſtudie? To let ſtrangers go, theſe of freſh memorie haue bene none of the baſeſt ſcholers in England: M.D. Buttes, principal Phiſition to king Henry the eight. Sir Thomas Eliot, Sir Thomas Smyth, who as you beſt knowe, and haue both truely and honourably teſtified in your Muſarum lachrymae, excelled therin. M.D. Recorde, both the Digges, M. Dee, who hir maieſtie vouchſafeth the name of hyr Philoſopher: M. Securis, M. Buckmaſter, M. Mounſlowe, M.D. Twyne, beſides moſt of our chiefe Doctors in Phiſike, as namely our M.D. Baro, in Cambridge, and M.D. Forſter in London, and ſome of our very chiefeſt Philoſophers in either Vniuerſitie, yt ſhalbe nameles, being not ſo certainly profeſſed

and renowmed that way. But to omit for breuities ſake, al other arguments and authorities that might plentifully be alledged in the mayntenaunce of Iudiciall Aſtrologie, I wil content my ſelfe, and I thinke, I ſhall content you with that only famous teſtimony of Melancton, amongſt many of his to the ſame purpoſe, ſet downe in an excellent epiſtle directed to the two noble & honorable Lords, George and Huldrich Fuggeri, in commendation of Aſtrologie. Norunt omnes ſani prorſus neceſſariam eſſe doctrinam, quae anni metas & ordinem oſtendit. Quam ob cauſam & ſapiens antiquitas hanc curā publicè doctiſſimis hominibus, qui cuſtodes erant religionis, commendauit, vt Solis circuitus & interualla, & aequinoctia, & ſolſtitia obſeruarentur, & menſium ſpatia, ad Solis iter accommodarent. But what followeth? Alteram partē quae Diuinatrix nominatur, multi acerbè vituperant, de qua alibi copioſiùs dixi. Quanquam autem nequaquam omnium euentuum humanorum cauſae ſunt, ſtellarum poſitus, & ſapienter cauſae diſcernendae ſunt, & vitandae praeſtigiae falſarum Diuinationum▪ tamen certum est, multas in Elementis mutationes, ab Aſtris oriri: & in craſi humanorum corporum, et ingeniorum inclinationibus lumen coeleſte magnā vim habere. Prodeſt autem ad valetudinem tutandam noſſe craſim corporum, & moribus prodest, cernere inclinationes

coelestes, & eas arte regere, aut fraenare, ſicut Pegaſum Bellerophontes, ita demùm rectè gubernauit, cū Pallas aureum ei fraenum iniecit. Wherein for his opinion de craſi corporū humanorum, he iumpeth with the auncient and moſt renowmed Phiſition Hippocrates, who in his booke de aere, aqua & regionibus, béeing tranſlated into engliſh ſaieth thus much in effect: If we ſhall conſider duly of the higheſt cauſes and béeings, we ſhall finde that Aſtrologie is not the leaſt portion of Phiſicke, for it behooueth ye Phiſition to know the moone, and the ſigne of heauen wherin the moone is, when anye patient beginneth to fall ſick, & ſo foorth. But hereof more at ſome other time, remitting you in the meane while to ye learned Apologie of Iunctinus, who is copious in theſe pointes, touching the defence of Iudiciall Aſtrologie. Now to come ſpéedily and directly vnto that, whereunto at this preſent ye particuler occaſion draweth me. In this yeare enſuing, 1583. which from the creation of the worlde is 5545. (to ouerpaſſe other néedleſſe computations and Chronologies: as how long from Noahs floud? how far from the deſtructiō of Troy? how many yeares from the Aſſirian, Perſian, & Macedonian monarchie, & ſo forth) The 28. of April being Sunday, about high noone, there ſhal happen a very greate and notable

Coniunction of the two ſuperiour and weightie Planets Saturne and Iupiter, which Coniunction ſhall be manifeſted to the ignorant ſort, by many fierce & boyſterous windes then ſodēly breaking out & continuing certain daies before and certaine dayes after the ſame Coniunction. Theſe two high planets ſhal be conioyned in the laſt minute of the 21. degre of Piſces, a ſigne (as is commonly knowne) of the watery Triplicity, feminine, nocturnall, ſeptentrional, commune, cold, moyſt, flegmatick, that is wholy of the nature & quallitie of water: the eſſential houſe of Iupiter, the eraltatiō of Venus, the gouernour of the féete, which Cō
               iunction may, and ought to ſéeme ſo much the more fearful & terrible vnto vs, by how much the more it is very ſtraunge, maruelous, rare, and moſt ſpecially noted of the learned. This is called of Aſtronomers, Coniunctio planetarū maxima, quippe qua reguntur leges, imperia, regiones: as Ptolomey the Prince of Aſtrologers writeth, and Cardane more at large in hys Philoſophical, and Aſtrological Commentaries vpon Ptolomey, This is that Coniunctiō 
               quae ſignificat prophetam, & deſtructionem quorundam Climatum, & ſectas, & regnum: damna pluuiarum & peſtilētiae, as Meſſahalah witneſſeth, whoſe bookes haue bene much eſtemed of kinges

and Princes. This is that Coniunction which Alboazen Haly ſaith doth praeſagire mortem regis magni & potentis, multam triſtitiam hominibus, damnum in diuitibus et nobilibus, etiam in illis qui ſūt ſicut Prophétae, et multas locuſtas. This is that Coniunction which Guido Bonotus affirmeth, to praemonſtrare res magnaes & mirandas venturas in mundo. This is that Coniunction, which Iohannes Molitor ſurnamed of his contry Regiomōtanus, a man in my opinion, little inferior in worthineſſe, or fame to the former more auncient Aſtrologers, doth report to portendere continuas aquarū inundationes, & particularia diluuia. Finally, this is that Coniunction quae minatur multum mali, as Iunctinus Florentinus teſtifieth, a great writer at this day, a Cō
               iunction and méeting, or ioyning togiter of ye very worſt & very beſt planet, Saturne & Iupiter, whereof the one is tearmed Infortunium maius, barbarouſly Infortuna maior, the other, Fortuna maior, both ſingular in their kinds, the one being (as it were) the Lorde of horrible miſrule, and tragicall miſchiefes, the other a preſident of ſouereigne bounty & felicitie, both Heauenly inſtruments, ordayned by God to thoſe high purpoſes and intendementes, wherin they are employed, more auncient indéede than in name, euerlaſting workers of contrarie

inclinations, and effectes in the worlde, to he ſhort both mighty Princes and potentates in their ſeuerall actions, ſo farre as it pleaſeth God to auctorize their procéedings, & vſe their miniſtery to his owne glory. Touching whoſe great coniunction, it is doubtles the more hard and difficult, to ſet downe any certaine effects & Accidents, therof to enſue, becauſe the Fortune and Infortune are equally matched, and as it were, indifferently encountered wyth power and ſtrength: For if the Infortune had bene greater and ſtronger than the Fortune, as if Saturne hadde bene ioyned with Venus, which is called Fortuna maior, Saturn
                no doubt would haue chalenged the prerogatiue or preeminence vnto himſelfe, as being mightier & of more force: or if Iupiter had béene ioyned with Mars himſelfe being Fortuna maior, and the other Infortunium minus, he would ſo haue repreſſed the ſturdines and furie of Mars, that the operations and effectes of that Coniunction ſhould haue bene indifferent, that is rather good than euill. Wherevpon in this caſe Guido Bonatus a famous and renowmed Aſtrologian of Italy, (as you knowe) in his fift Treatiſe de 146. Conſiderationibus, ſetting downe 4. eſpeciall wayes and principall points, wherein an Aſtrologer may ſooneſt be deceiued, and

moſte eaſily ouerſhoote himſelfe, maketh this the fourth, Difficile erit aliquid certi iudicare, ſi aequales fuerint Fortunae cum Infortunijs. Moreouer theſe two planets doe not beholde one another by any aſpectuall radiation, as either by Trine or Sextile, which are aſpectes of amity & frendſhip, or by Quartile and oppoſition, which are aſpectes of enmity and hatred, for then it had bene ſomwhat ye eaſier to determine thereof in reſpect of the general Iudgemēt, but they are ioyned togither in one degrée, and one minute of the ſelfe ſame degrée and ſigne, whiche is termed of the Aſtrologers, Corporalis congreſſus, Coitus, or Coniunctio, being alwayes of more power, ſtrength, force, and efficacie, than anye other aſpect, becauſe as Stoeflerinus writeth in his 12. Propoſition: In ea radij maximè propter vnionem condenſantur, which alſo Hermes Triſmegiſtus himſelfe affirmeth in verbo ſeptimo, where he ſayth: Aſpectus non poteſt diminuere ſignificationem Coniunctionis, Coniunctio verò minuit ſignificationem aſpectus, why? nam fortior est aſpectu, as there followeth. And yet by nature it is ſimplye and eſſentially neither good nor euill, but ſometimes good and ſomtimes euil, according to the nature and diſpoſition of the planets, which are conioyned, ſo that conſequently, quia Coniunctio honorum bona est, malorum autem

mala, difficilè admodum erit iudicium in Coniunctione illa, quae & bona reſpectu Iouis & pernitioſa reſpectu Saturni iudicatur. Diuers of ye learned in this facultie & namely Alboazen Haly, Capite 4. partis octauae
                ſaith, quòd Iupiter iunctus cum Saturno prohibet omne malum, whereas Franciſcus Iunctinus auoucheth the contrarie, to wit, that Coniunctio boni cum malo, mala est, alleaging this very Coniunction of Saturne and Iupiter for example, but on both ſides they cō
               clude with this clauſe or definitiue ſentence, hoc tamen pro natura & diſpoſitione planetae vincentis in figura iudicandū est. This therfore now only remaineth, to conſider which of them ſhal be ſtrongeſt, and of moſte vertue, power and might in the heauen at that inſtant. For Meſahalah in his excellent Treatiſe de Coniūctionibus planetarū, deliuereth this iudgemēt, Scito quòd cum Iupiter fortior fuerit Saturno, ſignificabit bonum in eadem Coniunctione, ſi verò Saturnus praeerit ſignificabit detrimentum atque tribulationem, which is alſo generally agréed vpō with ye reſt. Wherfore we are to vnderſtand, that Iupiter is ioyned with Saturne in Piſces, which is hys owne proper and naturall houſe, but by night, and not by day, which is a little the woorſe, becauſe him ſelfe being a maſculine, diurnal, and fortunate planet, he doth not ſo much reioyce

in a feminine, nocturnal, and infortunat ſigne, as he doth in a ſigne of his owne diſpoſition & qualitie. For ſo Alcabitius one of ye moſt notable Arabians, very well concludeth in Iſagogae aſtrologicae prima differentia: Fortitudo Planetae reboratur quando est in ſuo Alhaiz, id est in ſua ſimilitudine maſculinus ſcilicet & diurnus in ſigno, & gradu maſculino & diurno: nocturnus verò & faemininus contra, which is likewiſe auouched by his Commentator Ioannes de Saxonia. whereof by a contrary ſequele it foloweth, that a maſculine and diurne planet is ſomewhat depreſſed and weakened in a feminine and a nocturnall ſigne, and yet becauſe it is the houſe of Iupiter, and himſelfe reſident therein, as in hys owne manſion place, and court (albeit Sagittarie be the houſe of his ſpecialleſt delight and ioy) he receiueth fiue dignities thereby, béeing by ſo much the more ſtrong, and vertuous, according to that ſenſible axiome of Guido Bonatus, capite 19. primae partis. Dum planeta est in domo ſua, est ſicut vir existens in propria domo: est autem quilibet fortior in domo ſua de Iure, quàm in aliena, & vt plurimùm de facto quàm alius, qui aliàs eſset fortior eo▪ vnde Trutanus, Ante ſuam gallus ſtat portam quiſque vaſallus.
                But yet Iupiter is not ſo highly promoted & exalted by hys owne houſe, but is well nigh as much humbled and

weakened by his vnlucky placing in the eight houſe of Death wherby he looſeth foure prerogatiues, then is he there alſo afflicted and oppreſſed by the preſence & company of frowning Saturne, and in the termes of Mars hys deadely enemy, in quarta coeli faeminina, & Meridional diſcendēt, which do alſo much decreaſe and abate his courage. So that it euidently appeareth, that the good planet Iupiter is but indifferent: & that as he will not do much harme ſo he can not doe much good. Now concerning Saturne, as Iupiter was neuer the better, becauſe he was in ſigno faeminino & nocturno, ſo Saturne béeing in the ſame ſigne, and alſo a diurnall and maſculine planet is much the worſe. For Meſſahalah in his golden booke, de reuolutione annorum mundi, the chapter intituled de anno timendo, ſaith plainely Saturnus in ſigno diurno et maſculino minus impedit, ſo that by an argumēt drawen frō ye cōtrary I may logically cōclude ye 
               In loco nocturno et faeminino magis impedit, but this impedimēt is nothing to ſpeak of or verie ſmal in cōpariſon of ye reſt: for beſides that he is in a feminine and nocturnall ſigne, & place of heauen contrary to his proper nature, he is withall peregrine too, and out of al his eſſential dignities in the ſame ſigne, wherby he hath fiue debilities or impedimentes. Furthermore he

is placed in domo octaua, whereby he hath foure more hinderances, & ſlow in motion, whereby he hath two detrimentes. In ſo much that if we ſet and oppoſe his 11. debilities, and the debilities of Iupiter againſt his fiue vertues, which is two to one, there is no doubt, but we wil ſoone & may truly conclude, Si illius Fortuna cum huius Infortunijs comparetur, nihil est: Iupiter
                is Orientall, ſo is Saturne: Iupiter is direct in motion, ſo is Saturne: Iupiter is frée from combuſtion, ſo is Saturne: Iupiter is little the better for his vertues, becauſe his hinderances are full as many, but Saturne is much ye worſe for his debilities, becauſe hys vertues bée not ſo many. For as Guido Bonatus notably determineth, Mali Planetae quantò magis ſunt impediti, tantò efficiuntur deteriores, & augmentatur eorum malitia, & eorum impedimentum. Sée the infortunate diſpoſition of infortunate planets the more they be troubled, diſturbed or intangled, the worſe and more malicious they are and conſequently do hurt and annoy the more ſpitefully. The concluſion & ſumme of al muſte nedes be this, that the vehemēt hatred, deſpite & malice of the vnlucky planet Saturne, hathe by his miſchieuous importunitie ouercome & vanquiſhed the good, wholſome, & ſwete nature of the beneuolous and fauourable planet Iupiter,
               
which victory (I feare me) and I thinke I am too ſure thereof, will cauſe great aboundance of waters, and much colde wether, much vnwonted miſchiefes & ſorow, much enuie, debate, quarelling, hatred and ſtrife, many grieuous and bitter contentions, muche going to lawe one with another for deade mens goodes and olde reckonings, manifold troubles, and ſodain vproares, much violent oppreſſion, extreame pouertie, hunger and miſery to the nedy and impotent ſort of people, great perſecutiōs of eccleſiaſtical perſons, much deſpitefull, iniurious, and wrongful dealing, as alſo the tragical ruine & deſtructiō of ſundry greatmen and noble perſonages, bothe olde and young, wherof ſome ſhall trecherouſly be entangled & entrapped, ſome violently ouerthrowne wyth ſhameful diſgrace and diſhonour, loſing bothe eſtimation, goods and life too. Greate feare and dreade ſhal come ſodainely vpon the people, a great ſterilitie and barrēneſſe of the earth ſhal enſue, manifold ſubmerſions, ſhipwracks, exuſtions, burnings, and ſuch other, waterie and fierie calamities wil followe: finally, a verie greate and ſore mortalitie, with many generall contagions, and peſtilent diſeaſes, both among men and beaſts, and ſpecially an extraordinarie death and deſtruction of fiſhes, and

al other creatures liuing, by, in, or vpon ye waters. Al which euils and miſeries, (howbeit I knowe euery man ſhall not perſonally féele them, yet if there appeare not a ſenſible difference betwene certaine yeares immediately following, and other ordinary yeares, let me loſe the credit of my Aſtrologie) ſhall bée the more dreadful and terrible, becauſe the good & amiable planet Iupiter is ſo much abaſed and humbled in the eight houſe, being ſimply the very worſt place of the heauēs that can be, called commonly of the Aſtronomers, domus incā
                  tationum, veneficiorum, timoris, magni infortunij, et etiam mortis: who will alſo begin to ſhrink and go backward the 10. day of Iuly, vntil ye 
               4. day of Nouēber, which ſhrinking too wil not a litle hinder his good and proſperous influence. All which time, frowning Saturne ſhal be retrocedent alſo, beginning his retrogradatiō the 25. day of Iune, and ſo continuing til the 10. day of Nouēber, yea and that which is more notable for the ſpace & continuance of theſe whole fiue or ſixe years togither, they ſhal both be very often retrograde, and more than commonly they vſe to be: and this withall is to be obſerued ye theſe two ſuperior planets Saturne and Iupiter ſhall the ſecond time alſo be very nigh the one ye other, ye 
               26. day of October, this preſent yeare 1583. being then almoſt conioyned againe togither

in Piſces, but both retrograde, & not long before, at the beginning of the ſecond Reuolution, and third part of the Aſtronomical yeare: to wit, at the Sunnes entrance into the Equinoctial ſigne Libra, moſt vnluckily and ilfaringly placed in the 10. houſe, which muſt néeds greatly increaſe their malice, and make their operations the more vnhapy & vnfortunate. The vnlucky conſtellation and conſtitution of the other planets, doth alſo ſéeme to helpe forward & augment the lamentable euēts threatned by this Coniunction'. For fiery and furious Mars peregrine & occidental in the fourth degrée, and ſixt minut of Leo, and placed in Gacodaemone, In domo vbi tristes, tragici, & exitiales euentus notantur, hauing there no leſſe than 12. impediments, whereby he is much afflicted, & gretly diſgraced, but ye more perniciouſly hurtful and malicious, portendeth wonderful contention, ſedition, treaſon, rebellion and warre: many tumults, mutinies & vprores, with horrible ſhedding of bloud, and warranteth this terrible Prognoſticatiō, that huge multitudes ſhall be ſpoyled, ſubdued, deſtroyed and murdered of their enemies, who ſhal furiouſly aſſaulte, & cruelly, vnmercifully and barbarouſly oppreſſe them perforce, with ſword & fire, And becauſe Mars, who is a fierce, violent, and outragious planet, is placed in Leo, a hot, cholerick

& fiery ſigne, which notwithſtanding of all the ſigned of ye Zodiaque is moſt excellent and moſt noble, for that it is ſo goodlily & gallantly adorned and decked with ſo many beutiful and notable fixed ſtarres, bearing ſignification onely of high and great matters, concerning ſtates, kingdomes and empires, béeing ye naturall, eſſentiall, and onely proper houſe of the mighty & roial planet Sol, who is the ſignifier of Princes, Potentates, and high Magiſtrates: but a mortall and deadly enimie vnto Mars, who is now moſt infortunately ſeated in his houſe: many tragicall miſchiefes and notorious calamities and preſaged to ſome great rulers and mighty gouernours, placed in ſoueraigne and ſupreme authoritie, or elſe it is vehemently to be feared, that in the Eaſt, and Southeaſt cuntries, a deſperate company of vile and villanous raſcals ſhall flocke togither, and ſeditiouſly, rebelliouſly, and traiterouſly ariſe in armes againſt their Princes and Magiſtrates: who, (as a dogge hath a day, and a ſpider prouiſion of ill fauoured géere to ſerue hir turne) ſhall for a time violently ſet vpon, and vehemently afflict many: which maugre their heads, muſt ſuffer grieuous and ſpitefull indignities. And yet becauſe he is Lord and Ruler of the 9. Houſe, wherein Mercury is moſt vnluckily appointed, being not

longe ſince muche diſcouraged and diſcomfited of him by a hatefull Quartyle Aſpect: it ſéemeth that diuerſe perſecutions are threatned vnto ſundrye Eccleſiaſticall perſons, which ſhall be muche diſquieted and vexed by their rage. All which maladies ſhall be the more hurtfull and vehement, becauſe he is entred into a fixed ſigne: according to that maxime of Haly, Capite quarto partis octauae. Siquando Mars fuerit in ſigno fixo, ſignificat fortes lites inter Reges, & eiectos,
                and in another place his iudgement is: Si Mars fuerit in ſigno fixo, ſignificat lites ſine ratione & cauſa. Beſide, he wil do the more harme alſo, becauſe he is in a maſculine and diurnall ſigne: Nam in ſigno foeminino & loco noctis, minoris impedimenti est: as Meſſahalah ſayth in his booke, De Reuolutione Annorum mundi, the 2
                     •
                  . chapter. Item, Mars in Leone, and in the 12. place from the Horoſcope, threatneth great loſſe and deſtruction in all kindes of beaſtes, that haue hoofes, or fléeces, and with all prognoſticateth that piſmires, waſpes, and other flyes, and vermyne ſhall not greatly abound. Furthermore, becauſe he is ſeated in the eyght houſe from the Moone, ipſe ſignificat interfectiones & infirmitates magnas in h
                     •
                  
                  minibus. To all which euills they ſhall be moſte ſubiect, which inhabite ſuch regions,

prouinces, territories, and cities, as are vnder the partition of the hotte ſigne Leo. Item, Sol Lorde of the Aſcendent, but peregrine, and out of all his eſſential dignities in the ſixtéenth degrée, and eyght and fortieth minute of Taurus, the night Houſe of Venus, and reſident in the tenth houſe, (the houſe of dominion, and power, wherein he would greatly haue reioyced, had he not bene ſo infortunately diſgraced by his weakeneſſe) will alſo helpe to increaſe the furie and outrage of Mars, cauſing much trouble, vexation, and ſorrowe, to ſome noble men, and honourable perſonages: yea this his placing doth furthermore ſignifie, that manye Magiſtrates ſhall be thruſt out of office, and depriued of all dignitie, and other aduaunced to their roomes, who peraduenture ſhal ſcarcely be ſo good, but moſte likely to verifie the Prouerbe, Seldome commeth the better. Item, Venus
                Ladye of the tenth houſe, being both peregrine, and combuſt, doth increaſe the ſignification of the Sunne, who becauſe he is Lorde of the Aſcendent, and infortunately ſeated in her houſe, ſignifieth a badde ſtate, not onely of Princes, but of their ſubiects too: which badde ſtate ſhall ſpecially be founde in the countries ſituat betwene the Eaſt and the Weaſt:

Moreouer Venus, who naturally is very fortunate, and a planet of a good and amiable nature, being withall ſetled in the 11. houſe, the houſe of amitie, friendſhip, & good fortune, would haue pronounced much good, if ſhe had not bene ſo vnluckily peregrine in the ſecond degrée, and third minut of Gemini, being there alſo combuſt, and accompanied with the miſchieuous Catabibazon: which is with all as vnhappy, and pernicious, as may be, by reaſon of hir fall in Geminis, in domo caſus ſui. For which cauſe ſhe is therefore to ſignifie much ſuttle diſſembling, and falſe packing amongeſt men: litle faithfull and ſound friendſhip, but much counterfait and fained amitie: naye, manye through vncurteous dealing, and falſhood, ſhal breake of friendſhip, ſo that one ſhal hardly repoſe any truſt in another: beſides, ſhe foreſheweth that much hatred, diſcord, and ſtrife, much matter of diuiſions & factions, much debate & cōtention ſhal enſue: & yet ſome naughty & vngodly perſons, (wherof the world ſhall neuer be to ſeeke, but what remedie?) are like to accord & agrée togither wel enough, or rather ill enough. For much ſhameful & filthy whoredom ſhal be ſecretly committed, diuerſe ſhall giue ouer them ſelues to pleaſure, voluptuouſneſſe, ryot, vnlawful concupiſcence, lecherie, forbidden luſtes, and other vncleane miſdemeanours.

But let thoſe that are ſo corruptly, & vilanouſly affected, beware in time, beaſt for euery dram of momentanie pleaſure, they be rewarded with a pound of durable ſorow. For beſides that many therby ſhal be ſhrewdly endammaged, & preſently puniſhed, according to the qualitie of their deſerts: the reſt of that vngracious crew, vnleſſe they repent, and amend the ſooner, ſhal altogither moſt wofully periſh, & be vtterly deſtroied, both goods, body, & ſoule too. Haly his iudgement is, ye 
               Venus iuncta cum cauda Draconis, ſignificat destructionem futuram in mulieribus:
                and this he alſo as reſolutely affirmeth, that Venus infortunata in vndecima domo, praeſagit leguminum caritatē.
                Finally, I am perſwaded, that ſhe will cauſe very many winds, bringing very much raine, by reaſon of her occidentall combuſtion in Geminis, in the houſe & termes of Mercury. And, as for Mercury, he in ſtatione ſecunda, placed in domo peregrinationum, itinerum, rerum ſacrarum, & religionis: but peregrine, and much afflicted in the 21. degrée, and 20. minut of Aries, in the houſe & termes of Mars his mortall enimie, doth ſignifie many iorneys, and voyages, much trauailing, great remouing from place to place, (for Aries as euery one knoweth, is a moueable ſigne, and Mercury a conuertible, and wauering planet) but not without many loſſes, dammages,

and troubles: ſo generally true it is, that is commonly alledged in a manner to this very purpoſe. The rowling ſtone, ſeldom gathereth any moſſe. For ſundry grieuances, much theft, many violent robberies, and ſpoylings, with wilfull murder, and cruell interfections ſhall be committed, in ſuch wiſe, that plaine, innocent, and true meaning men, (whereof our world now a dayes is not greatly lauiſh) and the honeſt and faithfull dealing marchaunt, ſhall eftſoones goe in daunger of loſing both goods and life. Furthermore, this his vnlucky conſtitution doth portend the irreligious, and impious behauiour of diuers wicked, obſtinate, ſtubborne, and diſorderly perſons, who will not care moſt deſperately to conſpyre, euen againſt heauen it ſelfe, and moſt horribly to abuſe, euen Ieſus himſelfe, in not eſteeming his ſacred & bleſſed word, in reuiling his zealous preachers, in making no account of religion, pietie, and godlines, in abandoning God him ſelfe out of their companie, and betaking them ſelues to all villanie. Likewiſe this his infortunate ſtate, threatneth like troubles, detriments, and daungers vnto thoſe, that are Mercuriſts, as namely, vnto Embaſſadors, ſecretaries, Notaries, Regiſters, Clarks, Scriueners, Meſſengers, Factours, Mercers, & ſuch other: as alſo vnto diuers of the learneder

ſorte, amongſt whom ſome hote controuerſies, and contentions are like to ariſe, touching ſome new contrary opinions, and hereſies, which ſhal be inuented, publiſhed, and maintained by certaine buſie fellowes, and factious heads, too affectionately wedded to their owne conceits. Item, Luna peregrine in the fourth degrée, and 58. minut of Sagittarius, decreaſing in light, and accompanied with hir Dragons head, in the fourth houſe, and nigh the fift, being but ſixe houres before, moſt infortunately in oppoſition, and at deſtance with the gentle and mercifull planet Venus, of whom I ſpake before, betokeneth many heauie calamities, impriſōments, diſturbances, and tribulations, with much thought, anguiſh, and ſorrow amongſt the common people, who not withſtanding ſhall not be puniſhed or afflicted, but according to their owne rebellious deſerts, and miſdemeanors: for hir oppoſition with Venus, ladie of the 10. houſe, ſignifieth the diſloyall and vnfaithfull hartes of many frowarde and diſobedient perſons, rebelliouſly ſet againſt their Magiſtrates, helping forwarde the miſchiefes and horrors preſaged by the infortunate conſtitution of Mars. And through hir companie with the Dragōs head, ipſa ſignificat conſumptiones, multas aquas, & damnū in frugibus, as a credible author teſtifieth. And hir application vnto frowning Saturne, by an aſpectuall radiation, I

meane, a malitious quartile aſpect: denotat, quòd accident hominibus infirmitates mortiferae, ſomnia horrenda, & opiniones expaueſcibiles, prouenientes ex abundantia melancholiae. And, what ſaith Haly, Cap. 4. Part. 8? Sol est anima mundi, qui ſi quando maleficus fuerit, intemperie afficietur Aër, vt cùm Luna malefica est, afficitur terra.
                An other iudgement of his is thus deliuered in the thirde chapter of the ſame eight part: Si quando tota Triplicitas ignea fuerit infortunata, (as now it is in the figure erected for the time I ſpeake of) accident damna, & occaſiones magnae Dominis, Regibus, & claris hominibus. Idem ſignificat ſigni vndecimae Domus, & eius oppoſiti, ſcilicet, ſigni quintae Domus, (in which ſigne Luna is now placed) mala, & infortunata constitutio. Item, Saturne placed in the eight houſe, and lord of the ſixte houſe, which is domus aegritudinum, morborum, & ſeruitutis corporis, foreſheweth many dangerous, and mortall diſeaſes, which are like to raigne and rage in their kind: as alſo the ſtubberne, diſobedient, and ill diſpoſed affections of diuerſe ſeruaunts towardes their Lordes and maiſters. Moreouer Saturne lord of the 7. houſe, which is domus Coniugij, Inimicitiae, Contentionum forenſiū, furti, & aliorum ſcelerum, threatneth many troubleſome, and terrible euents, which are like to be as miſchieuouſly accōpliſhed. But, as touching this his lordly gouernment of the 6. and 7.
               
houſes, togither with certaine other Incidents, which by the figure erected might Aſtrologically be gathered, for breuities ſake, and for ſome other good conſiderations, I adde nothing, acknowledging that the heauenly and almightie Iupiter, (that I may ſo ſpeake) ſitting aboue Sol and Luna in his euerlaſting maieſtie, ruleth both Saturne and Iupiter, at his gratious will and pleaſure, as alſo furious Mars him ſelf, with Venus, and Mercury too: quae inclinant modò, non neceſsitant, as is truely anſweared in an olde diſtinction. Neuertheleſſe, I am verily perſwaded, that no Nation, or Countrie ſhall beholde this great Coniunction vnpuniſhed: but amōgſt the reſt, they I graunt, ſhall eſpecially feele the vehement force, and violence thereof, that inhabite ſuch regions, as are ſubiect to the firſt, and ſecond Climat.
            Thus, as compendiouſly, as on the ſuddaine I could, I haue here, Brother, written downe, in what ſigne, and parte of heauen euery planet ſhall be placed: how affected and diſpoſed in the celeſtiall ſcheme, at that very inſtant and moment, in which this great, and wonderfull Coniunction ſhall happen, with the ſeuerall, and ſpeciall ſignifications of eche of them particularly, according to the place of their reſidence at that time: agréeing wholy wt the Aſtrological iudgements, and predictions of the moſt auncient and

beſt approued writers in this profeſſion. Which I haue done to this ende, to ſhewe as it were in a glaſſe, what concordaunce and agréement, there ſhall then appeare betwéene one planet and another: and what good or euill euery one of them ſhall for his part procure: good, by diminiſhing, ſlaking, and repreſſing the miſfortunes which are preſaged by the Coniunction: euill, by helping forwarde, and encreaſing the perilous malice, and as it were, venemous ſpite thereof.
            Nowe, to treate ſomewhat more ſpecially touching the weather, & conſtitution of the aier, I haue good coniecturall Arguments to perſuade me, that great ſtore of rayne and colde is lyke to enſue, that wée ſhall haue much haile, thunder, and lightning, much vnſeaſonable, immoderate, tempeſtuous, and boyſterous weather, that huge waters ſhall ariſe, that floudes extraordinarily ſhall increaſe, many ouerflowings happen, diuerſe irruptions of waters ſuddainly breake out, cauſing ſome loſſe by lande, but muche greater decaye of ſubſtaunce by ſhipwrackes on the ſeas, whereby very many ſhall be ſhrewdely endammaged, and not a fewe vtterly vndane. Whiche operations and effectes the late Eclipſe of the Sunne, which happened the laſte yeare 1582. the twentie daye of Iune in the watrie ſigne Cancer, ſhall meruailouſly

helpe forwarde and augment, eſpecially in winter this yeare, 1583. for theſe foreſaide Accidentes ſhall continewe vntill the beginnyng of the nexte ſprynge after, Anno 1584.
                At which time about the ende of March, and the beginning of Aprill, there ſhall happen a wonderfull, ſtraunge, and rare Coniunction, conuent, or aſſemblie in a maner of all the planets in Aries, a fierie ſigne. So that then both Saturne and Iupiter ſhall forſake Piſces the laſt ſigne of the watrie Triplicitie, and inhabite Aries the firſte ſigne of the fierie Triangularitie: which alteration from one contrarie triplicitie to his contrary, cannot be without diuerſe newe effects oppoſite to the former. For ſo Haly concludeth, Duo planetae ponderoſi, (as Saturne and Iupiter are) ſemper faciunt diuerſitates ſua mutatione de vna triplicitate in aliam, & de vna natura in aliam, & de vna haiz in aliam. Wherefore now the watrie Trigone ſhal periſh, and be turned into fire. Iupiter ſhall be ioyned with Sol, with Mercury, and with Luna: Saturne ſhall be ioyned with Venus, and with Mercury: Mercury ſhall be in Coniunction with Iupiter, and with Mars: Luna ſhall be one while ioyned with Saturne, another while with Venus, another with Mars, with Iupiter the ſecond time, and then with Mercury, and laſtly of all, there ſhall be a great Coniunction

of Iupiter, and Mars, which is the third waightie planet, and in malice litle inferiour vnto deuouring Saturne him ſelf. After which kind of Coniunctions, ſome terrible, and fearfull Comet, or blazing ſtarre is like preſently to enſue: for the congreſſe of planets in a fierie ſigne, doth commonly foreſhew, and in déede naturally cauſe a blazing ſtar. As by induction of examples might at large be diſcourſed, but one for euery ſigne ſhall ſuffice. In the yeare 1556. in the ſame moneth of March, when there was the like coaceruation of both ſuperiour and inferiour planets in this very ſigne Aries, there followed immediatly a great Comet. Anno 1434.
                after the like méeting of the planets in the ſecond fierie ſigne Leo, their appeared likewiſe a fierie Comet. As alſo after their Coniunction in the third fierie ſigne Sagittary, Anno 814.
                before the death of the inuincible and moſte renowned Emperour Carolus Magnus, there enſued in like manner a terrible, and tragicall Comet. And if a Comet, as I haue now problably inferred, ſhall ariſe, theſe effects muſt be looked for, much ſcorching and vehement heate, the drying vp of ponds and déepe waters: barren, and vnfrutefull fieldes: and conſequently, a dearth of all victuals, beſide a ſore death of cattel, and many peſtilent diſeaſes amongſt men. But if no Comet appears, there ſhall doubtleſſe be ſéene other horrible and

rufull viſions in the Heauens, and many very ſtraunge & terrible ſights in the middle region of the aier, as fierie Meteors, flaſhings, and flamings of fire, wonderfull traiections, and impreſſions, much lightning, and thunder mixte with haile. Whereby many ſhall be perillouſly terrified, and ſome miſerably vndone. For euen at the very ſelfe ſame time the operations and effectes of the ſunnes Eclipſe, which hapned the laſt yeare, 1582. as alſo of this great & ſtraunge Coniunction ſhall ſtill continue: which ſhall afterward be accompanied with another fearefull and pernicious Eclipſe, 1585. in Tauro, nigh the head of Meduſa, called of ye 
               Arabians, Caput Algol,
                a moſt hurtful, violent, cruell, and mortall fixed ſtarre, of the nature of Saturne and Venus. Whoſe ſignifications for ſo muche as they are not alike, the one threatning vehement heat, the other extreame cold, and with all the great Coniunction of Saturne and Mars in Piſces, a watrie ſigne: and the great Coniunction of Iupiter and Mars in Aries a fierie ſigne, both in Aprill next, 1584. being thereunto ioyned, whereof alſo the one threatneth exceſſiue cold, the other excéeding heate, there muſt neceſſarily follow very great inequalitie of the aier, & very much inconſtancie and alteration of the weather, which mutual infraction of qualities, non niſi coruſcationes nubium ſequentur, as Leouitius ſpeaketh, yet the force

and power of this Coniunction ſhall heare moſt effectuall ſwaye, eſpecially in March, Aprill, May, and Iune, Anno 1584.
                bycauſe then moſt of the planets ſhall runne there courſe in hote and drie ſignes, as alſo 1585. in March, Aprill, and May, when Mars a hote and fierie fellowe ſhall poſſeſſe a hote and drie ſigne: with whome Saturne ſhall fellowſhip himſelfe, being then too ſeated in a fierie ſigne, & one while in Cōiunction with Venus, another while with Sol, with Mercury, and with the Moone, with whom alſo Mars and the other planets ſhall be mingled: which Coniunctions ſhall al happen in firie ſignes. And this yéere ſay I, is like to proue an vnhappie yeare for diuines, & religious perſons. Item, in April, Anno 1586.
                the effects of theſe méetings ſhall euidently appeare at which time, there ſhall fall out a Coniunction of Sol & Saturne, Mars and Venus, Mars & Mercury, Venus and Mercury, Saturne & Mercury, Saturne & Venus, Sol and Luna, Saturne & Luna, Mars & Luna, Venus & Luna, Mercury & Luna, and laſtly of Saturne & Mars, which is a great Coniunction, and therefore the worſe, and more terrible. Which Coniunctions for aſmuch as they ſhall all happen in the ſame ſigne Aries, a fierie ſigne, there muſt néedes enſue diuerſe ſtraung effects, much feruēt & excéeding heat, many rare & dreadful impreſſions in the higheſt region of the aier,

and conſequently a ſore and perillous drought. To make ſhorte, in this yeare ſundrie wofull, and cruell euils, togither with many ſtraunge and horrible euents ſhal ſenſibly appeare, which ſhall principally moleſt and afflict the weaſtwarde countries. But of theſe terrours, one of vs, eyther I, or if my leyſure, by meanes of my finall profeſſion, happen to fayle me, my brother Iohn will treate more particularly hereafter, (if God ſpare vs lyfe), in there ſeuerall and ſundrie yeares, according as the effects, and operations of the aforeſaide Coniunctions ſhall ſpecially worke, and take place: as alſo of the Comet with the Eclipſes of the Sunne and Moone, which I haue onely touched here, reſeruing euery ſuch notable particular Accident, to his proper time and place, then ſeuerally to be diſcuſſed eyther by me, or by him. This alone I will adde, as a néedefull Caution and admonition for thoſe, which in there natiuities had Aries placed in their Horoſcope, accompanied with other planets, or which had the ſuperiour planets placed then in the ſame ſigne of the Zodiaque, as alſo for thoſe, which had ye great light of heauen, the Sunne I meane, or the lord of the aſcendent, or the lord of the natiuitie placed in Aries, illi enim in primis ad choraeas coelestes inuitabuntur, aliquídque noui molientur, the iudgement carrieth ſufficient authoritie.

And eſpecially let Germanie and Italy beware, for many grieuous calamities, with ſuddaine chaunces and chaunges are threatned to the countries there aboutes, by this forcible concurſe of planets in Aries: theſe nations béeing chiefely and principally vnder the regiment of that ſigne, wherevnto our Aſtrologers adde namely the Regions, and Seigniories following: Britaine, Fraunce, Bastarnia, Syria, Philiſtim, Polonia minor, highe Burgonie, Sueuia of Germanie, Syleſia ſuperior, Pars Westriae, Naples, Florence, Capua, Ferraria, Verona, Vicentia, Bergamum, Imola, Padua, Bruſuicum, Vtricha, Lindauia, Cracouia, Marſilia, Saragoſſa, with certaine other Territories, and Prouinces neare adioyning. Praetereà, the ſame ſigne beyng the houſe and manſion place of Mars, there are portended many lamentable, and wofull caſualties in battayle, vnto the Germaine and Italian ſouldiers: whiche ſhall fall out, eyther by treacherie, and prodition, or through the careleſſe ſecuritie and ſluggiſhneſſe of their Captaines, two perillous and deadly enimies to Martiall procéedings, as by all hiſtories is moſte manifeſt, ſpecially to you, that are ſo perfectly acquainted with them. Now, touching the whole continuaunce of the aforeſayde ſtraunge effectes, and operations of this preſent

great Coniunction, I ſuppoſe it will ſuffiſe to quote the iudgement of the famous Philoſopher, and Phiſitian Cardane, deliuered in his Commentaries, vpon Ptolomeis Quadripartita Constructio,
                concernyng that poynt. Whoſe wordes are thus ſet downe verbatim in the ſeconde booke, ninth chapter, and LIV, Text of thoſe excellent Commentaries. Effectus durant ad reditum, vtpote Coniunctio Saturni & Iouis, vſque ad aliam coniunctionem: & Saturni ingreſſus in initium Arietis, vſque ad alium ingreſſum in initium Arietis, quia nihil datur inane in natura, & ideo ſi effectus non duraret vſque ad reditum, eſſet circuitus Mathematicus, non Naturalis, & cauſa ſine effectu, & impotentia quaedam. Quamobrem, proportio circuitus ad circuitum, vt temporis ad tempus quod erat probandum. Vnuſquiſque tamen horum circuituum redigitur ad dimidium, nam ab oppoſitione finitur coniunctionis vis, attenditurque ipſa oppoſitio. Whiche place of Cardane may ſummarily ſuffiſe for warrant of the continuaunce, ſo farre as Art, and mans foreſight extendeth. For otherwiſe, vt caetera omnia, ſic planetae in Manu Domini, who is truely termed of the olde Philoſophers, Ens Entium, and Cauſa Cauſarum, wherin I am to ſubſcribe to the opiniō of the noble Mathematiciā & Aſtrologer, Petrus Pitatus,
               
who in the Proeme to his Diaria, giueth out this learned iudgement: Ex futurorum euentuum generibus; ſunt, quae habent cauſam determinatam, & infallibilem, vt motus coeli, ortus, & occaſus ſignorum, Coniunctiones planetarum, & luminarium Eclipſes, & ſimilia: in quibus est determinatio, & infallibilitas ex parte motoris, atque etiam omnis impedimenti remotio, ex parte qualibet, niſi in quantum ſubiacent diuinae voluntati, & Prouidentiae, quae tamen ſemper Ordinatè agit: with much more importing the ſame concluſion, his onely exception is, ni ſecus à prima cauſa, ſecundae miraculoſe impediantur. And thus much touchyng the notable effectes, and operations of this great Coniunction, in the laſt face of Piſces, and the firſte of Aries. Now, by a ſenſible conference of the ſame with other Coniunctions, whiche haue heretofore happened in the watrie Trigone not without certaine famous, and moſte notable euents conſequently enſuyng: I will preſume, to ſet downe certaine Concluſions, collected out of auncient iudgementes and predictions of Aſtrologie, whereby it ſhoulde in greate likehood appeare not onely that ſundrie, rare, and wonderfull euents muſt néedes follow, but alſo that the very frame of the worlde, cannot endure long after. Wherefore, to ſpeake onely of the watrie Trigone, which ſhall now beare rule for a time,

which Trigone conſiſteth of theſe thrée ſignes of the Zodiaque, Cancer, Scorpio, Piſces: it ſéemeth a reſolute caſe, (vnleſſe my induction marueylouſly faileth me) that their neuer hapned any great Coniunction of the ſuperiour planets in any of thoſe thrée ſignes, but ſome extraordinary chaunge, and notorius alteration enſued. Firſt, after the mightie Coniunction of the two higheſt planets, Saturne and Iupiter in Cancer, which is reckened the firſt ſigne of the foreſaide watrie Triplicitie, (which Coniunction hapned in angulo quartae domus, the ninth moneth from March firſt called of the Romanes, and now of vs Nouember) the world was ouerflowed with that wonderfull exceeding deluge, which to this day doth, and ſhal euer beare the name of Noahs floude: ſuch a floude as the world ſhall neuer ſée againe. Secondly, this fourth Monarchie, called the Romane Monarchie, to follow the common diſtinction, (howſoeuer Monſier Bodine probably reaſoneth to the contrary) wherein we now liue, and are ſtill to preferre before the Turkiſh Monarchie, ſéeme it neuer ſo ample and huge, began vnder the dominiō of the watrie Trigone: for the 47. yeare before the glorious natiuitie of our ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt, and fiue yeares before the deſtructiō of the moſt valerous and puiſſant captaine, Iulius Caeſar there hapned a great Cō
               iunction of the ſuperiour planets in Scorpio, the

ſeconde ſigne of the ſame Triplicitie, at whiche time that moſt Memorable and notorious ciuill war betwéene Caeſar and Pompey, was verie hote and violent, the end whereof enſued a litle after the ſame Coniunction, whereupon Iulius Caeſar hauing oppreſſed the contrarie force, and valiantly ſubdued his enimies, whiche defended their auncient ſtate, and common libertie, did firſt eſtabliſh this fourth moſt noble Monarchie. Thirdly, not long after this, namely, ſixe yéeres before the happie birth of our Redéemer, there hapned a Coniunction of theſe mighty ſuperiour planets, Saturne and Iupiter, in the laſt face of Piſces, which is the laſte ſigne of the watry Trigone, & the beginning of Aries, which is the firſt ſigne of the fierie Trigone, which Coniunction hapned neuer ſince, but only in the daies of the worthy chriſtian Emperour, Carolus Magnus, Anno. 789. whiche is almoſt 800. yeares ago, but is now to happen once againe in this preſent yeare 1583. Touching which, foraſmuch as it is the laſt Coniunction that euer ſhal happen in the end of the watrie Trigone, I am Aſtrologically induced to this cōiecture, that we are moſt like to haue a new world, by ſome ſuddaine, violent, & wonderful ſtraunge alteration, which euen héeretofore hath alwaies hapned, at the ending of one Trigone, & beginning of an other, but now moſt eſpecially is like to happen,

bicauſe ye cōtrarie Trigone ſuccéedeth his cōtrarie, the fierie followeth ye watrie, vnder which, or the like ſucceſſion, a notable mutation hath already hapned two ſeuerall times: to wit, in the time of Iulius & Auguſtus Caeſar, when as this fourth Monarchie (as I ſaid before) was eſtabliſhed with much effuſion of bloud: & againe in the time of Carolus Magnus, and his father Pypin, (as I alſo ſaid before) at which time, as hiſtories report, Monarchia haec eneruata aliquantum reſpirauit: yea, your Paulus Iouius, as you beſte remember, after two or thrée other moſte honourable gréetings, ſaluteth this noble Emperour with theſe gallant Titles, Salue Christiani Imperij propagator auguſtiſsime, Pontificiae dignitatis aſſertor & vindex, aureaeque demum aetatis conditor: which laſt addition of Iouius, maketh moſt for our purpoſe, togither with that ſuperlatiue Iuſtification of his ſurname not much before, non magni modò, ſed Ter Maximi cognomento digniſsime ſo that withall we forget not what the ſame Iouius ſhortly after writeth, continuing the foreſaide braue Apoſtrophe, directed vnto Charlmaine him ſelfe: Te Auſpice, Italia in primis, quae iampridem à Gothis, & Vandalis deformata, prostrataque, ferrei ſaeculi iniurias pertulerat, ſe vſqueadeo faelici rerum omnium prouentu erexit, vt pristinae amplitudinis ornamenta reciperet. hauing a litle before giuē out certaine other

commendations of his martiall prowes, tempered with deuotion and wiſedome, in theſe honourable Terms: his longè optimis belli & pacis artibus, non indomitos modò Saxones, & peruicaces Cantabros, perpetuis victorijs deuictos, verùm, quod ad perenniorem laudem nobilius fuit, Longobardos arroganter & impiè ſacroſancto Pontifici infaestos, Deo vltore, funditus exciſos videmus. But, to leaue the ſecond foundation, and as it were, the reedifying of the imperiall Monarchie vnder Charlmaine, which is farre better knowne vnto you, than vnto me, (how be it by the way it would not be forgotten, that Romanum Imperium apud Graecos perstitit à Constantini Magni Temporibus, vſque ad Tempora Caroli Magni, in quem nomen duntaxat Imperij tranſlatum est ad Germanos, as Agrippa writeth in his inuectiue diſcourſe, De Nobilitate:) and to returne now to the preſent Coniunction, cōſidering that this fourth Monarchie began firſt about the ende of the watrie Trigone, and was afterwarde weakened and decayed vnder the ſame, as appeareth by the premiſſes: maye it nowe ſéeme likely and probable inough, that it ſhall alſo finally be ended and deſtroyed vnder the ſame Trigone? And, for ſomuch, as our Lord and Sauiour tooke our humane nature vpon him, beyng borne of the virgin Marie in Bethlem, at the ende of the watrie Trigone, and the beginning of the fierie

Trigon: the ſame now happening againe, may it not alſo ſignifie and portend, ſome wonderfull and maruelous alteration ſhortly after to enſue? yea, why not euen that great, & dreadfull time, wherin the ſame Iheſus Chriſt, ſhal come againe in vnſpeakeable maieſtie, to iudge both the quicke and the dead, conſuming the whole world by fire? for now ſhall the fierie Trigone raigne, and all the Coniunctions of the ſuperiour planets which hereafter ſhall happen, ſhall continually be in fierie ſignes, till the accompliſhment almoſt of 200. yeares. In the raigne of Carolus Magnus, albeit the like Coniunction happened, yet the world could not then be at an ende: howbeit euen at that very time, there were excéeding great Cō
               tentions amongeſt Princes, debated with many fierce battailes, horrible murders, & much ſhedding of bloud: to which effect I can not but remember thoſe goodly verſes of the excellent Italian Poet, Honoratus Faſitellus:
               
                  —tum primùm Gallica ſigna
                  Boetis, & infractus victricia ſenſit Iberus.
                  Intremuere Aſiae Reges, ia cuítque ſubacta
                  Punica terribili tellus concuſſa duello.
               
Which are to be vnderſtoode of that ſelfe ſame time▪ yet then I ſay, could not the conſummation of the world be, becauſe 5000. yeares from the Creation of the world, were not yet expired,

but now the influence and effects of this preſent great Coniunctiō enduring and continuing, as I haue ſayd, how litle to ſpeake of, ſhall remaine wanting, to make vp the complete number of 6000. yeares, which account is originally grounded vpon the auncient famous prophecy of Elias, concerning the worlds continuance, foretelling that the ſame ſhould ſtand 6000. yeares: 2000. vaine: 2000. ye lawe: 2000. Chriſt: which togither make in all the final number of numbers 6000. yeares. Wherof it hath already continued 5544. ſo that not ſo much as 500. yeares doe now remaine, of which alſo, ſome euen of thoſe that are yet behind, ſhall be abridged in reſpect of our infinite ſinnes, & excéeding wickednes, as it followeth in the ſame prophecy. Yea our Sauiour Chriſt him ſelfe hath promiſed in his Goſpel written by S. Mathew, the 24. chapt. that he wil detract ſomewhat of ye appointed time, ſaying: Except thoſe daies ſhould be ſhortned, there ſhould no fleſh be ſaued, but for the elects ſake, they ſhall be ſhortned. So that all circumſtances being weyed, and all Aſtrological likehoods togither with prophetical predictions conſidered, what doubt is there, but we may, and ought to perſwade our ſelues, that the foundation of the world is in a manner worne out, and alſo this goodly frame ready to fall vpon our ſhoulders?

for if ſo be there yet remained another great Coniunction of Saturne and Iupiter like to the firſt, then ſhoulde there be required a Remanet of almoſt eight hundred yeares moe, which being added to the yeare of this great Coniunction, would amount to the number of ſixe thouſand and almoſte foure hundred yeares: which manifeſtly oppugneth the prophecie of Elias aboue rehearſed, and Plato, before 25. of thoſe yeares were exſpired, would bid vs whoe. Almighty God, through his infinite power, and vnſpeakeable wiſedom, in ſixe dayes created heauen and earth, the ſea, and al thinges therein contained, but the ſeuenth day he reſted, and hallowed the ſame: wherein ſome haue repoſed a high miſterie, imagining, and perſwading them ſelues, that by the ſacred miniſterie of his holie worde in this preſent life, within the compaſſe of 6000. yeares, he will alſo gather togither his Church, wherwith in the ſeuenth he wil celebrate and kéepe holy his eternall and euerlaſting Sabaoth. To which purpoſe they affirme, that the prophecie of Elias, was as it were allegorically borrowed from this number of the ſixe dayes Creation, applying to euery daye, 1003. yeares, alledging to that effect, out of the nynetie Pſalme, for a thouſand yeares in thy ſight, are but as yeſterday, & citing withal that

place of Saint Peter, in the third chapter of his ſecond epiſtle, Dearely beloued, be not ignorant of this one thing, howe that one day is with the Lorde as a thouſand yeares, and a thouſand yeares as one day. But how ſoundly theſe teſtimonies be applied to the enforcement of my concluſion, it is for learneder men to determine, my ſelfe dare not be ouer bold with Textes of ſcripture, which are ſo reuerently, and religiouſly to be handled, and therfore take it beſt, to ſtand rather vpon the probabilitie of Aſtrologicall predictions, and namely, vpon that olde, and common prophecie, touching the yeare 1588. which is now ſo rife in euery mans mouth, and was ſo reſolutely defended in a publique diſputation in the laſt Commencement, by one, ſufficient to maintaine his aſſertion. That yeare hath many hundred yeares agone bene ſpecially foretold, and much ſpoken of amongeſt Aſtrologers, who haue, as it were, vnanimi conſenſu, prognoſticated, that either a maruelous feareful and horrible alteration of Empyres, Kingdoms, Seigniories, and States, togither with other wonderfull, and very extraordinary Accidents, as, extreme hunger, and peſtilence, deſperate treaſons, and commotions, ſhall then fall out, to the miſerable affliction, and oppreſſion of huge multitudes: or elſe, that an vtter,

and finall ouerthrowe, and deſtruction of the whole world ſhall enſue. Which prophecie for ſo much as it is reputed of ſo great conſequēce, and withall ſo nearely toucheth the ſcope of the preſent Treatiſe, I will here ſet downe, as it is deliuered by Leouitius, in Latine verſes, made, as moſt ſuppoſe, by Regiomontanus, but tranſlated out of a former ſtyle, farre more aū
               cient, as were alſo the Dutch verſes of Stoeflerinus importing the ſame Contents.

                  Post mille expletos à partu Virginis annos,
                  Et post quingentos rurſus ab orbe datos:
                  Octogeſimus octauus mirabilis Annus
                  Ingruet, is ſecum tristia fata feret.
                  Si non hoc anno totus malus occidet orbis,
                  Si non in nihilum terra, fretúmque ruet:
                  Cuncta tamen mundi ſurſum ibunt atque retrorſum
                  Imperia, & luctus vndique grandis erit.
               
Which Latine verſes, after the maner of our rude méeter, I not long ſince at aduenture engliſhed, for a friend of myne, but I make more account of ſo ſolemne a prophecie, than to diſgrace it here with my poore tranſlation. You ſee what therein ſerueth to my purpoſe, that either a finall diſſolution, or a wonderfull horrible alteration of the world, is then to be expected. I might alledge many other arguments, and authorities, implying the ſame concluſion, but I auoide to be ouer tedious. And yet

am I violently brought to a further conſideration of the premiſſes, by ſuch extraordinary, and as a man would ſay, preſignificatiue Accidents, as theſe following: When were there euer ſéene ſo many dreadfull Eclipſes of the Sunne and Moone? When ſo many ſtraung, and wonderfull copulations of planets? when ſo prodigious Comets, not without their tragicall operations? When ſuch terrible Examples of fierie Meteors, coruſcations, traiections, impreſſions, and inflammations in the Aier, as haue bene already obſerued in our Age, and will more fearefully appeare within fewe yeares? When was the Earth ſo violently & terribly ſhaken with an Earthquake, as it was the ſixt of Aprill, 1580. not onely in Ingland, and Scotland, but alſo in other Countries, and Nations further off? which Earthquake, (notwithſtanding your pleaſant Entrance into that Philoſophicall Diſcourſe, deliuered thereof by you ex tempore in company of honeſt gentlemen, & gentlewomen aſſēbled togither to make merry) ſéemeth yet vnto me a matter of no ſmal conſequence, wherevnto your ſelfe alſo ſéeme to incline in the earneſter part of that Diſcourſe. Were not ſuch ſignes and tokens foretold by our Sauiour Chriſt? hath he not forewarned vs, that they ſhould appeare & ſhew them ſelues, as it

were in their terrible likenes? a litle before, or in his very comming? doth not withall the contempt of good learning, the cōtempt of good maners, ye contempt of good lawes, the contēpt of good Magiſtrats, the contempt of all good gouernment, nay, doth not the contempt of good religion, good pietie, good charitie, & al goodnes, which ſince theſe latter daies neuer ſo vniuerſally raigned, as now it doth? doe not theſe general abuſes ſéeme to argue & import as much? whē was ye world ſo quite deuoid of care? whē ſo ſecure, ſo reckleſſe, ſo bent againſt all diſcipline, and order? when ſo vainly wicked or ſo wickedly vaine? when was innocencie more ridiculous, faithfulneſſe more contemptible, vertue more abiected, holines more prophaned, loue more hated, duty more neglected, honour more diſhonoured, honeſtye more deſpiſed, good life more wounded to death, than now a daies? Finally, when ſuch vnnatural partes, ſuch monſtrous corruptions of bodye & mind, ſuch vile & abſurd indignities, ſuch inordinate, & barbarous procéedings, without any reſpect to law, or conſcience, ſo vniuerſally put in practiſe? when euer yt like general luſtineſſe, & iollitie, with ſuch deſperate wilfulneſſe, and ſelf-loue, not in one or two more highly minded, or hawtily ſet than their fellowes, but euen commonly in the whole world to ſpeake of?

when euer ſo iuſt occaſion of complaint with the Poet? Omne in praecipiti vitium ſtetit. What is now the Concluſion? Truely, that the ſecond comming of the ſonne of man draweth nigh, which ſhall be as were the dayes of Noah, for as in the dayes which were before the floud, they were eating, and drinking, marrying, and giuing in marriage, euen till the day that Noah entred into the Arke, and perceiued nothing, till the floud came, and ouerwhelmed them all, ſo ſhal alſo the comming of the ſonne of man be. Mathew 2
                     •
                  . May we not nowe ſenſibly perceiue, that theſe dayes of ours, and the dayes immediatly following, are ye very daies here expreſſed: yea, euen thoſe dayes which Chriſt him ſelfe did ſo certainely, and more than prophetically foreſhewe vnto his Diſciples, preaching vnto them of the deſtruction of the Temple, the ende of the world, and the latter dayes? Why then doe we ſtill dwell in ſecuritie, and deceiue our ſelues with vaine conceits, building vp a mountaine of miſeries, inſteade of the right felicitie? If we knowe our Lordes will, and doe it not we ſhall worthily be beaten with many ſtripes. Wherefore let vs now at the laſt, ſpéedily and carefully call vpon our mercifull God, leſt he conſume vs in the heate of his heauy wrath, and indignation: let vs humbly ſue for grace, and hartily craue

pardon and fauour at his hands, leſt ſuddaine deſtruction ouerwhelme vs: let vs with penitent, and obedient harts fall downe before the throne of his celeſtiall maieſtie, aſking remiſſion of our manifold ſinnes, and villanies, and with a contrite affection, earneſtly and vnfainedly embrace the gladſum tidings of his holy Goſpel, that through his infinite goodnes, and excéeding mercy, we may be ſafely protected, and wholy deliuered from all theſe horrible euils both of body and ſoule. For ſée what comfortable and ſwéete words the Lord of Hoſtes hath vttered with his owne mouth: If ye walke in my Ordinances, and kéepe my commaundements, and doe them, I wil ſend you raine in due ſeaſon, and the land ſhall yéeld hir encreaſe, and the trées of the fielde ſhall giue their fruite and your threſhing ſhal reach vnto the vintage, and the vintage ſhall reach vnto the ſowing time, & ye ſhal eate your bread in plenteouſnes, and dwel in your land ſafely, and I wil ſend peace in the land, and ye ſhall ſléepe, and none ſhal make you afraid, and I wil rid euil beaſtes out of the land, and there ſhal no ſword goe throughout your land, and ye ſhal chaſe your enimies, and they ſhall fall before you vpon the ſword and fiue of you ſhal chaſe an hundred, and an hundred ſhal put ten thouſand to flight, and your enimies ſhall fall

before you vpon the ſword: for I will haue reſpect vnto you, and make you increaſe, & multiply you, and ſet vp my couenant with you, and ye ſhall eate olde ſtore, and carry out the olde, becauſe of the new, and I wil make my dwelling place among you, and my ſoule ſhall not loath you: I wil walke amongſt you, and will be your God, and ye ſhall be my people, and ſo foorth. Theſe are the goodly and bleſſed promiſes, which the Lord of Heauen & Earth wil aſſuredly and plentifully performe vnto thoſe; that doe faithfully feare, and truly worſhip him, in that integritie of holines & righteouſnes, that him ſelfe requireth. For no doubt, he is a moſt merciful God, & a moſt louing father, ful of compaſſion, full of pacience, & long ſuffering, ful of goodnes & pitie. And yet as he is excedingly merciful to the repentant ſinner, ſo is he alſo iuſt & terrible to the wilful & obſtinate reprobate. For thus on the other ſide hath the Lord of Lords from the throne of his omnipotent Maieſtie thundered: but if ye walke contrary vnto me, and wil not harken vnto me, I wil alſo walke contrary vnto you: I wil bring vpon you fearfulnes, conſumption, and the burning ague, to conſume your eyes, and gender ſorrow of hart, and ye ſhal ſowe your ſeede in vaine, for your enimies ſhal eate it, and I wil ſet my face againſt you, and ye ſhal

fall before your enimies: they that hate you, ſhall raigne ouer you, and ye ſhal flye when no man followeth you, and I will breake the pride of your power, and I will make your heauen as yron, and your earth as braſſe, and your labour ſhall be ſpent in vaine, for your land ſhall not giue her encreaſe, neither ſhall the trées of the landes giue their fruites: I will alſo ſende in wild beaſtes amongeſt you, which ſhall robbe you of your children, and deſtroy your cattell, and make you fewe in number, and make your high wayes to be deſolate. And if ye may not be reformed by theſe thinges, I will puniſh you yet ſeuen times for your ſinnes, and I will ſend a ſworde amongeſt you, that ſhall auenge my couenant, and when ye are gathered togither within your cities, I will ſend the peſtilence among you, and ye ſhall be deliuered into the handes of the enimie. And when I haue broken the ſtaffe of your bread, ten wiues ſhall bake your bread in one ouen, and they ſhall deliuer you your breade againe by waight, ye ſhall eate, and not be ſatiſfied. And if you will not yet for all this harken vnto, but walke againſt me, I will walke contrarye vnto you alſo, and will chaſtiſe you ſeuen times more for your ſinnes: and ye ſhall eate the fleſh of your Sonnes, and the fleſhe of your Daughters

ſhall ye deuoure: I wil deſtroy your high places, and cut away your images, and caſt your carkaſſes vpon the bodies of your idols, and my ſoule ſhall abhorre you: and I will make your cities deſolate, and bring your ſanctuarie vnto naught, and will not ſmell the ſauour of your ſwéete odours: I wil bring your land vnto a wilderneſſe, and your enimies which dwell therein, ſhall wonder at it. Leuitic. Cap. 26. Nowe, Lord, can any be ſo vngraciouſly ſtiffe necked, and hard harted, as not to be terrified and aſtoniſhed with the horrour of ſuch maledictions? then, alas, let him that hath an eare, heare what the Creator ſpeaketh vnto the Creature, the Lorde of Lordes, to his rebellious ſubiect, Almighty God to man, to clay, to duſt, and aſhes: let euery one remember, what he hath receiued and heard, and hold faſt, and repent: he that ouercommeth ſhall inherite all thinges, and I will be his God, and he ſhall be my ſonne, ſayth he that ſitteth on the Throne. But the fearefull, and the vnbeleuing, and the abhominable, and murtherers, and whoremongers, and idolaters, and ſorcerers, and all liars, ſhall haue their part in the lake that burneth with fire and brimſtone, which is the ſecond Death. Let vs therefore repent with Niniuie, leaſt we be conſumed with Sodome,

and Gomorrha: let vs doe his commaundements, that we may be bleſſed, that our power may be in the trée of life, and that we may enter in, through the gates into the citie, and take the water of life fréely. Babylon is made a dwelling place of diuels, a cage of vncleane birdes, ſpirits and goblins ſhall walke in hir pallaces, fearefull wilde beaſtes ſhall lurke there: ſcritchowles, and oſtriges ſhall walke in hir houſes, Apes and Satyres ſhall daunce in hir beautifull buildings, wilde Cats ſhall cry therein, and Dragons ſhall there abide, no voice of men ſhall be heard in hir, no ſoūd of a bell, or a mill ſhall be heard, no light of a candle ſhall be ſéene, but perpetuall ſolitude, deſolation, and ſorrow ſhal remaine and dwel there for euermore. But, we will faithfully praiſe the name of our Lord Ieſus, and in pacience poſſeſſe our ſoules, that when ſuddaine deſtruction ſhal come vpon the careles world, we may lift vp our heades, and behold our redemption at hand. We will no more looke for life, but where it dwelleth, in the fleſh of Chriſt alone there it reſteth, all promiſe and hope of life is in him, he hath alone the words of life, he is alone the bread of life, the water of life, the autor of life, the word of life, the trée of life, the onely life, he that beléeueth in him, hath euerlaſting life. We will cry no

more vpon Angels: we will looke no more vnto our owne workes: we will truſt no more in our owne prayers: we will no more call for the helpe of creatures, they are all ſubiect vnto vanitie: there is no life, but in Chriſt aboue: the Elders, the Angels, the Beaſtes, all Creatures they giue this honour vnto Chriſt: ſaluation is of him, that ſitteth vpon the Throne, and of the Lambe, and altogither they cry, Amen.
            
            You will maruell, Brother, to ſée me thus vehemently, & zealouſly affected in a priuate Diſcourſe, but truly the incomparable greatneſſe, and importance of the Argument, to him that hath entered into any reaſonable conſideration of ſo vniuerſall future calamities, as dayly threaten vs, muſt néedes ſéeme to require much more, than I haue here ſayd, or can poſſibly ſay.
            The laſt notable thing, that I haue to obſerue this yeare, 1583. is, that there ſhall not appeare vnto vs in our Horizon, any Eclipſe, either of the Sunne, or of the Moone. Marry, foraſmuch as the influence, and working of that Eclipſe of the Sunne, which happened the laſt yeare, 1582. beginneth to take place and effect but in this preſent yeare, 1583. in Maye, perduring till that tyme Twelue moneth, 1584. I haue thought it

not inconuenient, to proſecute theſe matters ſomewhat further, and to deliuer my ſimple Iudgement touching that Eclipſe, preſuming herein of your pacience, as in the premiſſes.
            
               
               Of the Eclipſe of the Sunne, which happened the laſt yeare, 1582.
               
                  IN this laſt yeare 1582. vpon the 20. day of Iune, immediatly after fiue of the clocke in the morning, the bodie of the Moone at hir chaung, being directly put betweene the Sunne and the Earth, or betwéene our ſight, and the Sunne, and thereby depriuing vs of the full light of his beames, there appeared within our Horizon at Cambridge, (as you remember) A ſmall Eclipſe of the Sunne, the Sunne and Moone being at that very inſtant conioyned in the ſeuenth Degrée, and 24. minut of the ſigne Cancer, within two degrées, & 39. minutes of Catabibazon, which Eclipſe albeit it were of ſmal continuance, the Sunne being bodily eclipſed or darkened by the Moone, but vnto thrée fingers, or points, and ſeuen minutes, hath notwithſtanding the proper influence and peculiar effectes: for as Meſſahalah a cunning and perfect Aſtrologer witneſſeth, whoſe bookes (as I ſayde) haue bene muche eſtéemed of mightye Princes, and as Experience hir ſelfe teacheth, There neuer happeneth anye Eclipſe of the Sunne, which doth not preſignifie and foreſhew ſome

great Accident to come to paſſe, and Ptolomey him ſelfe the Prince of Aſtrologers affirmeth, that the fatall conuerſions, ouerthrowes, and deſtructions of kingdomes, may Aſtrologically be foreſéene, and prognoſticated by the Defects and Eclipſes of the Sunne and Moone. Whereby Thales Mileſius, as Plinie credibly reporteth, did certainly foretell, ſundry chaunges, and alterations of ſtates, and kingdomes, to happen in Aſia, which afterward came effectually to paſſe, euen according to his Aſtrologicall prediction: & the like is auouched by diuerſe other, of ſome other well ſéene the ſame way. Whereupon Eclipſes haue bene the more ſpecially regarded, and obſerued of the beſt Aſtrologers, as is very well exemplified by Stadius: but I will returne to the preſent Eclipſe, from whence I haue a litle digreſſed. It is firſte to be noted, that the Sunne was eclipſed in Cancer, which is the naturall and eſſentiall houſe of the Moone, wherein ſhe reioyceth moſt, and wherein alſo the moſte beneuolent and fauourable planet Iupiter, called commonly, Fortuna maior, doth aſcend, béeing therein chiefly eleuated, and exalted: a ſigne of the partition of the watrie Trigone, feminine, nocturnall, northerly, moueable, of direct aſcenſion, whom Capricorne doth obey by reaſon of his ſuperioritie, vnſauery of taſte and effect, beyng naturally colde and moiſt, and of the

flegmaticke complexion, gouernour and ruler of the breaſt, the mouth of the ſtomacke, the lunges, euen almoſte to Diaphragma, or the Midriffe. Nowe the nature and properties of the ſigne being knowne, conſidering that it is a colde and watrie ſigne, it betokeneth, according to the Iudicials of Aſtrologie, that greate aboundaunce of rayne is like to enſue, with many perillous ouerflowinges by rage of waters: whereby a great number ſhall be ſhrewdly hindered, and endammaged, it will alſo cauſe much rawe, inconſtant, and diſtemperate weather, euill for all kinde of cattle, but eſpecially for ſhéepe: it portendeth the deſtruction of much fiſhe, and water foules: great enuie, ſtrife, debate, contention, and ſedition with many priuie conſpiracies, vnlawfull fraies, violent oppreſſions, robberies, and murders, yea and much martiall prouiſion, and preparation for warre, beſide ſundrie loſſes, and grieuous perils vnto thoſe, that get their liuing by toyle and labour on the ſeas, or other waters, which ſhall come to paſſe, by meanes of tempeſtuous, and immoderate weather, wherewith many ſhippes ſhalbe ouerthrowne, many mariners, and watermen drowned, many townes and cities deſolate, nigh vnto the ſea. Moreouer there ſhall followe a great death, and ouerthrow amongſt the baſer, and poorer ſort of people, according to that iudgement

of Proclus. Cum acciderit Eclipſis Solis in Cancro, obſcurae turbae, ignobiliſque plebeculae interitus ſequitur, diuturnae bellorum ſeditiones, & aquatilium, marinorumque, & aliorum in aequore degentium magna pernicies.
                   Which ſaing of Proclus, the infortunate conſtellation and conſtitution of the other planets do ſéeme to verifie: for Saturne was retrocedent in a feminine and nocturnal ſigne, to wit, in Piſces, which is a ſigne of the ſame complexion and qualitie that Cancer is of, being alſo flegmaticke, cold, moiſte, and of the nature of water: Mars, Venus, Mercury, and Luna, two of them in a drie and colde ſigne: the other two in a colde and moiſt ſigne, and alſo in a moyſt manſion, will likewiſe increaſe the colde watrie operations of this Eclipſe, and for their part, helpe forwarde the effects thereof. And as for Iupiter, he too was much abaſed and weakened by his Retrogradation in Aquario, a moiſt ſigne. Item Mars being in Tauro, and in oppoſition to his owne houſe, is become more ſturdie, and infortunate: and being lord of the 10. houſe, he noteth that Lordes and Nobles wil much afflict and oppreſſe their poore tenants by enhauncing their rents, & putting them to huge fines, without regard of cōmon reaſon, equitie, or pietie: ſo that the poore farmers ſhalbe ſcarcely able to liue, and maintaine their neceſſarie charge. He ſignifieth futhermore the vtter deſtruction,

and ouerthrowing of thoſe, which ſhal rebelliouſly ſet themſelues againſt their rulers and magiſtrates: for he is in oppoſition to the ſame his owne houſe, himſelfe remaining in angulo Quartae Domus, vnde emittit ſurſum, & aſcendunt eius calores & malae naturae ad omnes alios planetas, as Haly ſaith) and there ſeated in Tauro the night houſe of Venus▪
                   which importeth much cloſe whoredome, and ſecrete vngodlineſſe amongſt many vncleane & wicked perſons, that haue ſhaken of the awe, which the feare of God ſhould bréede in them, and onely haue reſpect to the impious pollicie, vttered in a common prouerbe, Si non castè, tamen cautè. Which pollicie too will fayle them in the end, and lay their corruption open to the generall vew of the worlde, and ſhamefull reproch of themſelues, ſo vniuerſally true it is, that the Poet writeth:
Quicquid ſub terra est, in apricum proferet aetas.
               
               I might here rehearſe ſundrie examples of diuerſe Eclipſes of the Sunne in Cancer, & thereby declare, both what deſtructions, and deaths, & alſo, what other ſtraunge and rufull accidentes haue enſued, but amongſt the reſt for ſhortneſſe ſake I will only report two, or thrée of the moſt notable, with the ſeuerall operations and effects thereof: that euery man of any reaſonable conceite, and capacitie, may thereby gather a ſenſible reaſon & cauſe of fatall conuerſions, changes,

and alterations by conference of the antecedent cauſes, and ſkilfully with diſcretion and iudgement apply the ſame to a farther conſequence of times and matters to come: for as Stadius in the preface to his Ephemerides excellently noteth: Dum cauſas praeteritorum interpretamur, eadem quoque Methodo & futurorum docemus, nam futura à praeteritis non ſpecie, non genere differunt, ſed tempore tantum, quod eadem vt accidens comitatur. A very wiſe rule, not onely ſeruing for theſe Aſtrologicall obſeruations, but much more to be extended to the right vſe of ancient hiſtories, and politique practiſes, deliuered to poſteritie for their imitation, in like neceſſities, and affaires. But, to containe vs now within our bounds, in the yeare 1424. the 26. daye of Iune, in the euening, as is credibly recorded, there appeared an Eclipſe of the Sunne in Cancer, the 14. degrée: at which time, Charles the king of Fraunce being valiantly ſet vpō in battaile by the Ingliſh men & Burgundians, was expelled his owne realme: warre was hotely maintayned betwéene the Danes, & the Sleſuicians: the Biſhop of Breame prouoking the Hollanders to battaile, was grieuouſly wounded of them, and taken priſoner: a terrible plague, and moſt vehement peſtilence and mortalitie of men enſued, continuing fierce, and hote a long time: afterwardes, certaine Princes of Germanie, entring Bohemia with a

great armie diuided into thrée partes, were forcibly repelled and driuen backe of the Huſſites, whereby the bounds of Bohemia were enlarged, and ſpread abroade, towardes Miſnia, and Noricum: finally, all the fruites of the earth, as corne, graine, vinetrées, and ſuch like, periſhed through vnſeaſonable pinching colde, and extremitie of weather.
               In the yeare 1569. the ninth day of Iulie in the morning, there likewiſe appeared an Eclipſe of the Sunne in the 26. degrée of Cancer, the influence, & effects wherof continued two yeares: when the Turkes martially aſſayling and inuading Pannonia, called otherwiſe Hungaria, and Syria, a countrie lying in the eaſt partes of Germanie, a portion whereof bordereth on Hungarie, (ſauing which part ye whole country beſides is altogither moūtainiſh) forcibly carried away many priſoners, & captiues, with ouer ſenſible proofe of their might & furie. Mathias Hunniades, ſurnamed Coruinus, a moſte fortunate prince, and as happie a warrier, who fiue yéeres before was crowned king of Hungarie, by Frederick than Emperour, denoūced & proclaimed warre againſt the Bohemians, being requeſted, and perſwaded thereunto by the Pope, & at that time by force of armes, tooke frō them Morauia, Sileſia, and Luſatia. The ſame Mathias cōtinued as fierce warre with Caſimire the king of Polonia,

couragiouſly inuaded the Turkes, often diſcomfiting and vanquiſhing them: gatte away Vienna from the Emperour, ſubdued, and conquered diuerſe other nations, and territories adioyning, in ſo much yt at his death, he deſerued this noble Epitaph of Antony Thaebaldeus:
                  
                     Coruini breuis haec Vrna est: quem magna fatentur
                     Facta fuiſſe Deum, fata fuiſſè hominem.
                  
               
               The Prince of the Tartarians at the ſame time, aſſaulted and ſpoyled Ruſsia, vpon whiche countrie Tartaria boundeth on the weaſt. The King of Denmarke was ſuttelly entrapped and taken by the craftie wiles, and cunning fetches of Sweden, There enſued a ſharpe battaile betwéene the French, and Burgundian, Anno 1571.
                   the force and influence of the Eclipſe ſtill continuing, many princes, and mightie potentates died: and amongſt the reſte, George the king of Bohemia, whom Ladiſlaus, ſonne to the king of Pollonia ſuccéeded. To conclude, Henry the ſixte King of Ingland, was within the reach of this Eclipſe, taken by king Edward the fourth, in the Biſhops palace at London, and by him committed to the tower, where afterwards he was murdered: as more fully appeareth by our owne Ingliſh Chronicles.
               Laſt of all, Anno 1536.
                   there hapned an Eclipſe of the Sunne in the ſeuenth degrée of Cancer, that is iuſte in the very ſelfe ſame

degrée, wherein the Sunne was darkened this laſt yeare 1582. After which Eclipſe there aroſe hote warre in Picardie, wherby both the French & Burgundians receiued mutuall harmes and dammages diuers wayes, which are reported to haue bene very great and grieuous. At the ſame time, the ſouldiers of king Ferdinand, brother to the Emperour Charles, being conducted by their Captaines to reſiſt the force of their enimies in Hungarie, were, as you know, trecherouſly betrayed into the handes of the Turkes by one Catzianerus: of whome they were almoſt all moſt cruelly ſlaine, their chief Captaines taken captiue, and carried away to Constantinople the Turkes chiefeſt citie, where they liued in miſerable ſeruitude and bondage. At the ſame time the Geldrenſes ſeditiouſly rebelled againſt their Soueraigne. At the ſame time, the moſt fruitefull, bewtifull, and noble Ilands Sicilia and Calabria, were wofully deſtroyed with fire, which did ſtraungly breake out of the ſealand béeing dried vp. At the ſame time their was heard at Rome, a moſt fearefull, and horrible thundering in the aire, béeing alſo the more extraordinarie for the very time of the yeare. At the ſame time, an auncient tower of Helderberg, being ſuddainly blaſted with lightning, did cauſe a ſore ruine, much miſchiefe and great miſerie to that citie. At the ſame time, in high Germanie, their hapned

an excéeding great inundation, the force and rage whereof, was paſſing wonderful, and maruelous ſtraunge. And after the ſame Eclipſe (which we in Ingland, ought chiefly to remember) twoo notable ſeditions and inſurrections did ſhrewdly trouble, and diſturbe vs héere in Ingland: which fell out in the 18. yeare of the raigne of the moſt mightie and puiſſant Prince king Henry the eight. Whereof the firſte was rayſed principally for religion amongſt the commons of Lincolneſhire, who had gathered togither nigh 20000. perſons, to ſerue their turnes in the atchieuing of that rebellious enterprize. The ſeconde beganne farther of, in Yorkeſhire, which northeren commotion was alſo attempted for matter of religion, the people there flocked togither, amounting to the number of fortie thouſand. Againſt thoſe of the firſt inſurrection, the King ſent out the Duke of Suffolke, with a ſtrong and princely power, which when the rebelles did vnderſtand, they ſtraight waies brake vp there armie, and ſuddainly departed. Againſt thoſe of the ſeconde inſurrection, whiche was ſo farre the greater, his Maieſtie ſent the Dukes of Northfolke, and Southfolke both, with a farre ſtronger power, and mightier hoſt of ſoldiers: vpon whoſe comming the battaile was appointed to be fought betwéene them on Simon and Iudes day, but the ſame night it rayned ſo

extréemely, that the twoo armies coulde by no meanes méete according to that appointment. Wherupon the rebels (as lightly they are woont firſt, or laſt) were glad to craue pardon the ſecond time, ſhewing themſelues very deſirous to depart, with due ſubmiſſion to their moſt noble Prince: ſo that both theſe ſeditions were finally pacified, and diſpatched with the death of a fewe Archerebelles, and Captaine commotioners, whiche were ſhortly after executed for example ſake, according to the haynouſneſſe of their diſloyall, and deſperate attemptes. The ſame Eclipſe might peraduenture be accompanied with ſome other ſemblable Euents: but theſe are the chiefeſt, that I can preſently call to minde, and are ſufficient, I ſuppoſe, to inferre my Concluſion, what héede is to be taken of like Eclipſes, and namely this of late. Whereunto if we ſhall nowe conſiderately apply the examples before alledged may we not generally conceiue, what ſequele of troubles and euils, is like to be prognoſticated by the ſame? And yet to ſpeake indifferently according to the rules of Arte, I perſuade my ſelfe, that the miſfortunes threatned thereby, ſhall neither be fully ſo hainous, nor of ſo long continuance, as were thoſe of the former Eclipſes. My reaſon is, bicauſe the quantitie of the Eclipſe hauing bene but very little & ſmall, (not one quarter of the Sunne béeing darkned)

the quantitie of the influence and effects is like to be proportionable. For ſo Meſſahalah iudgeth in his booke de Rebus Eclipſium, the 7. chapter. In Eclipſi Solis ſemper ſignificatur magnum aliquod Accidens, ſed tamen ſecundùm quantitatem ipſius Eclipſis. Wherefore the quantitie of this late Eclipſe béeing ſo ſmall, I preſume, the operations, and ſequeles thereof ſhall be both the leſſe in quantitie, and the ſhorter in continuance. Nowe, as concerning the Regions, Prouinces, territories, and cities which ſhall chiefly be afflicted and oppreſſed with the euils enſuing, (whiche euery man will be readie to demaund) it is ſufficiētly knowne, which are principally vnder the dominion, and regiment of the ſigne Cancer: as Numidia, Africe, Bithinia, Phrygia, Colchis, Carthago, Regnum Franciae, Regnum Scotiae, Regnum Granatae, Comitatus Burgundiae, Pruſsia, Hollandia, Selandia, Constantinopolis, Thumiſſa, Venetiae, Mediolanum, Genua, Luca, Piſa, Lubecum, Treueris, Magdeburgum, Gorlicium, Berna, Ciuitas S. Andreae, Yorchia, ſiue Eboracum, as they are confuſedly heaped togither by our chiefeſt Aſtrologers, reſpecting rather matter, than forme. Of whiche very countries, and cities, thoſe perſons too ſhall eſpecially féele the violence of this Eclipſe, whiche had Cancer placed in their Horoſcope. And this in effect is all, that I haue preſently

to ſay, touching the influence, and ſequele of the foreſayde late Eclipſe▪ For, as for thoſe two inſtaunces, which you in your chamber, not many moneths ſince, obiter, and as it were, diſputandi cauſa obiected agaynſt me, reaſoning then familiarly of the obſeruation, and héede that was to be taken of Eclipſes: the one of Agathocles, the famous captaine, and tiranne of Syracuſae, the other of L. Sulpitius Gallus a noble Romane: whereof Agathocles, as I remember, in his wars againſt the Penians, when ſo euer anie Eclipſe was to happen the day before their battaile leaſt his ſouldiers ſhould take any preiudiciall or ſuperſtitious conceite thereat, vſed, as you then alledged, to diſcourſe vnto his armie the whole reaſon thereof: ſhewing them, that what ſoeuer ſhoulde chaunce there, was to followe by courſe of nature, & appertained nothing to their Militarie affaires: Sulpitius Gallus vnderſtanding likewiſe on a time, that an Eclipſe was at hande, aſſembled his ſouldiers togither, and warned them thereof afore hand, expounding vnto them all the reaſon, and naturall cauſes of Eclipſes, leaſt they ſhould ignorantly miſtake them, for heauie, and vnluckie tokens: As for theſe two inſtances, I ſaie, I muſte néedes graunt, they were good martiall pollicies, and wiſe Stratagemes for the preſent, to abandon ſuch feare, as their ſouldiers might

haply otherwiſe haue conceyued, by ſuch ſhews of ſome infortunate chaunce, to befall them, but as according to Ariſtotels ſaying in his Politiques, Non est tuta Regula hominum voluntas: ſo I thinke, theſe, and ſuch lyke Militate deuiſes, are not of force, to proue, or diſproue any other Concluſion, but this, that in the time of neceſſitie, or extremitie, eſpecially in warre, it is wiſedome, to make the beſte of euery ſuch Accident, and to interprete it in ſuch wiſe, as may ſéeme moſte behouefull for the incouragement of thoſe, whom it concerneth, to be kept in harte, and to be deliuered of all by feare, that might any way daunt, or aſtoniſh their minds. Which no doubte was Aeneas his politique cō
                  ſideration, where Virgil writeth of him: Spem vultu ſimulat, premit altum corde dolorem.
               
               In which caſes, not ſo much the very truth and conſequence of the matter is commonly regarded, as what is moſt expedient, and auaileable, to ſerue preſent turnes. At an other time I remember, you vrged vpon me the like hiſtorie out of the fourth booke of Q. Curtius, de Rebus gestis Alexandri.
                   Where it appeareth, how Alexanders ſouldiers were at the firſte terrified, and aſtoniſhed, with a terrible Eclipſe of the Moone, and how againe afterward recomforted, and ſatiſfied, by a cunning and ſuttle interpretation of certaine learned Egyptian

Aſtrologers, there preſent in the campe. The place is very notable, and therefore I haue thought it worth the recyting. Firſte, their maruelous feare, and agonie is thus deſcribed. Prima ferè vigilia luna deficiens, primùm nitorem ſideris ſui condidit, deinde ſanguinis colore ſuffuſo, lumen omne foedauit: ſollicitiſque ſub ipſum tanti diſcriminis caſum, ingens relligio, & ex ea formido quaedam incuſſa est: Dijs inuitis, in vltimas terras trahi ſe querebantur: iam nec flumina poſſe adiri, nec ſidera pristinum praestare fulgorem, vastas terras, deſerta omnia occurrere: in vnius hominis iactationem, tot millium ſanguinem impendi: fastidio eſſe patriam: abdicari Philippum patrem: coelum vanis cogitationibus petere. Then followeth Alexanders remedie, and meanes of pacification, more politique for the effect, than true for the cauſe. I am pro ſeditione Rex erat, cum ad omina interitus, Duces, Principeſque militum frequentes adeſſe praetorio iubet, Aegyptioſque vates, quos coeli ac ſiderum peritiſsimos eſſe credebat, quid ſentirent, expromere iubet. At illi, qui fatis ſcirent temporum orbes implere destinatas vices, Lunamque deficere, cum aut terram ſubiret, aut ſole priuaretur, Rationem quidem ipſis perceptam non edocent vulgus, but what Reaſon then? Caeterùm affirmant Solem Graecorum, Lunam eſſe Perſarum, quotieſque illa deficiat, ruinam, ſtragemque illis gentibus portendi: veteraque exempla percenſent

Perſidis Regum, quos aduerſis Dijs pugnaſſe, Lunae ostendiſſet Defectio. Whereupon Q. Curtius interlaceth this politique iudgement: Nulla res efficaciùs multitudinem regit quàm Superſtitio, alioquin impotens, ſaeua, mutabilis, vbi vana religione capta est, meliùs vatibus quám Ducibus ſuis paret. For the effect of that forged interpretation, or rather, of that counterfaite Stratageme, was this: Igitur edita in vulgus Aegyptiorum Reſponſa, rurſus ad ſpem, & fiduciam erexere torpentes. So eaſie a matter it is, by any colourable deuiſe, or pretence of reaſon, to content the vnquiet mindes, and aſſwage the reging furie of the multitude. In whiche caſe, many both Martial and Mercurial experiments haue bene practized, that are not to enforce any rule of Art, other than this, what way a politique man is to take in time of like extremitie. As for that efficacie, and ſequele of Eclipſes, that I here ſpeake of, found out by induction of Examples, and obſeruation of cunning Aſtrologers, it is not to be iudged vpon by any ſuch Stratagematicall cōceit either vttered in word, or practized in déede, at the point of neceſſitie: but to be credited ſo farre, as the iudgement of the learned in this facultie, and the foreſayde Exemplifications may giue it credite. Artifici in ſua arte credendum: eſpecially if that Artifex be ſo expertus, as he ought to be, & as here I make

Account he is, conſidering what alreadie hath bene alledged, and may father be iuſtified. But, for this preſent, ſufficiat, quod ſatis est. For mine owne part, as I hope the beſte, ſo I feare the worſt, enclyning in ſome ſorte to the olde rule, addiſcentem oportet credere. What ſoeuer befalleth other places, I truſt Ingland is ſtill to continue in Gods fauour, who from day to day, and from yeare to yeare, mightily preſerue our gracious Queene, as hitherto ha hath done: who graunt hir moſte excellent Maieſtie, a long and proſperous raigne ouer vs, that wée may ſtill enioye this happie continuaunce of peace, wealth, health, and other our ſpeciall felicities, whereas the ſworde, penurie, and ſo many plagues, haue ioyned their forces, in a manner againſt all other nations. Who for his excéeding mercie ſake, vouchſafe vs his ſingular accuſtomed fauour more and more, and continually bleſſe hir ſoueraigne Highneſſe more and more. I doubt not, but euery true Ingliſh harte will ſay, Amen.
               
               I haue now deliuered what I thought conuenient in this kind: vnleſſe haply you will furthermore enioyne me, to ſet downe my Aſtrologicall iudgement particularly & ſeuerally of the foure quarters of this yeare 1583. after the ordinary manner of our common Almanack makers: which although it be leſſe néedefull, being

already performed by them, yet to take away all matter of ſuſpicion, which other wiſe you might perhaps in ſome part conceiue of my inſufficiencie this way, and withall to diſcharge a péece of my promiſe in the former diſcourſe, I haue briefly noted ſo much, as I would thinke neceſſary for common inſtructions, to ſerue either publique, or priuat turnes, and namely Oeconomical prouiſion, if this Treatiſe were to come into more hands.
            
            
               A ſhort Iudgement of the foure partes of this yeare, 1583.
               
                  1 THe Spring time enſuing, is, in my opinion, like to be very moyſt, very windie, and ſomewhat cold.
               
                  2 Summer, I ſuppoſe, will be rather moiſt than dry, with ſome haile, thunder, and lightning, eſpecially in Iuly, and September.
               
                  3 Harueſt will be diuers, and inconſtant, moyſt, windy, cloudy, temperate, and dry.
               
                  4 The Winter ſeaſon is moſte like to be vnſeaſonable, tedious, & very long, not without great ſtore of haile, raine, ſnow, many boiſterous windes, and very much colde, harde, ſharpe, and tempeſtuous weather.
               The whole yeare, to ſpeake more vniuerſally,

is like to proue but a bad yeare for al maner of cattel, but eſpecially and principally for ſhéepe. Peaſe & Beanes, I ſuppoſe, wil be plentifull, & good cheape: but wheat, by my coniectures, wil be ſcarce, & very deare. Barlie ſhall be indifferent, but yet of the two, rather deare than cheape. We are like to haue good ſtore of Honie, & ſufficient plenty of Oyle. Butter & Chéeſe, ſhal be ſomewhat deare: we are not to looke for any ſtore, or aboundance of fruite: a dearth of victuals is much to be feared: grieuous loſſes by ſhipwracke: ſundry dammages by fire: many ſhamefull whoredoms, thefts, robberies, ſpoiles, oppreſſions, treacheries, and mutinies greatly to be dreaded: perillous factions, ſeditions, tumults, inſurrections, & vprores, togither with hot preparance for warre to be loked for, eſpecially in ye Northeaſt cuntries. Many infirmities, & diſeaſes, ſhall generally raigne both amongeſt men, womē, & children, procéeding of vnnaturall moiſtnes, & diſtemperate heat, as by ye Euent wil more ſenſibly appeare. The death of ſome mighty, & renowmed Magiſtrate by all Aſtrological Coniectures is to enſue: & finally a ſore mortalitie is very like to inuade many places, as well ſomewhat neare hand, as farther off: which God of his euerlaſting goodnes, & mercy, turne from his Elect, continuing our happy ſtate and quietnes in Ingland, to his gracious pleaſure.
               
                  Hauing thus much preſumed of your paciēce, cōtrary to my maner in ſuch priuat writings, I wil yet aduenture, to trouble you a litle farther, with ye view of a certain Phiſical & Aſtrological table of Phlebotomie: which, (vpon occaſion) I haue lately drawne, & already cōmunicated wt a friend or two, ſtudious this way & deſirous thereof. I will not ſay, but ſome error may peraduēture ſcape me therin, as in ye reſt: & if you happen to light vpon any ſuch I am to craue pardon, as in ye reſt. The only preamble, I here thinke néedeful, is ye notable Aſtrological, & Phiſical iudgement giuē out by Hermes Triſmegiſtus him ſelf, in ye very ende of his Iätromathematica, ad Amonem Aegyptium,
                   thus tranſlated into Latine by Stadius, in the Prolegomena to his Ephemerides. Multū refert in quae hora primus morbi inſultus deprehēdetur, obſeruare, an eo tēpore benefici in ortu ſint, aut mediū coeli occupent, plus námque ſic cōstituti, collapſis alióqui viribus: opis ſubminiſtrabunt, 
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      praestantiſsimus poſsit Medicus: ſcrutari igitur & diē, & horā decubitus exactè oportebit, & mundi poſitū examinare: nihil enim homini ſuperuenit, quod ex coeleſti conſenſu, & ſympathia non oriatur, & originem ducat. Which famous & authenticall Maxime of Hermes, togither with the long approued verſe, borrowed from Heſiode: Ipſa Dies, hodie Mater, cras ipſa Nouerca,
                   may generally ſuffice for the iuſtifying

of that difference, & diſtinction of houres, dayes, and times, which either here is, or els where may Aſtrologically and Phiſically be maintained. And ſo with my dutifull Commendacions, I hartily commit you to the protection of God: being loth to be ouertedious in officious wordes, or ſentences of curteſie, howſoeuer other whiles I may chaunce to ouerſhoote my ſelfe in matter of Diſcourſe.
            
            
               
               A COMPENDIOVS Table of Phlebotomie, or bloudletting, ſetting downe by diuiſion the generall and ſpeciall conſiderations thereunto belonging.
               
                  AS in other things, ſo in Phlebotomy, or letting of bloud, the Cauſe is firſt ſkillfully & circumſpectly to be conſidered, as that it be to purge the bodye of ſome vnnaturall, naughty, and ſuperfluous humor, whoſe ſubſtance is either ſimple, or mixt: ſimple, when it doth of it ſelfe, without the admixtion of any other, degenerate, as bloud doth, when it putrifieth in the veines, the pores being ſtopped: mixt, when it is mingled with ſome that is already corrupted, as in the Dropſie, where the bloud is mixt with water, then the Cauſe being thus allowed vpon, & certainly knowen for néedefull and good to the pacient, (for otherwiſe letting of bloud is very daungerous, and openeth a way to many grieuous infirmities, and withall here would generally be noted, that it is not cōuenient either for a very leane & weake man, or for a very fat, & groſſe man to be let bloud) there remaine to be conſidered:
               
                  
                  How it ſtā
                     deth with ye Pacient.

                        inwardly

                              
                                 1. for his complexion.
                              
                                 2. age.
                           
                        
                        outwardly

                              
                                 3. for the time of the yeare, and moneth generally.
                              
                                 4. for the time of the day, and diet particularly.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  1. Complexion.
                  
                     1. In the complexion is to be conſidered, whether he be

                        
                           1. Sanguine, that is, hot and moiſt.
                        
                           2. Collerick, that is, hot and dry.
                        
                           3. Melancholy, that is, cold and dry.
                        
                           4. Phlegmatick, that is, cold and moiſt.
                     
                  
               
               
                  2. Age.
                  
                     2. In his age, whether he be

                        in his youth.
                        in his manly, or middle age.
                        in his elderly age.
                        in his crooked old age.
                     
                  
               
               
                  3. The time of the yeare.
                  Concerning the time of the yeare, he is to be aduiſed, what partes thereof are

                        good, as the Spring: from the middeſt whereof to the beginning of ſummer is ſimply the beſt time for this purpoſe: howbeit ſome thinke Autumne reaſonable good, as no doubt it is, in compariſon either of ſummer or winter: being otherwiſe in it ſelfe, to be reckned rather for bad, than good.
                        bad

                              very bad, as Summer and Winter, for their extremitie of heate & cold.
                              more tolerable, as Autumne, being ſomewhat more temperate.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  4. The time of the moneth.
                  Concerning the time of the moneth, theſe generall Cautions are to be obſerued, that he be not let bloud in any member, with any chirurgical inſtrument, either▪
                     
                        The Moone being in Tauro, Geminis, Leone, Virgine or Capricorno: or the laſt halfe of Libra, & firſt of Scorpio.
                        
                        The Sinne, the Moone, or the Lord of the Horoſcope, being in the ſigne, that ruleth that member.
                        The Moone being in any part of via lactea, or in via combuſta, or in domo caſus ſui, or being vacua, or tarda curſu▪
                            or in terminis infortuniorum, or in the duodenarial diuiſion of the twelue houſes, placed either in 1.6.8. or 12. place thereof, or applying to the Lorde of the 8. houſe.
                        The day before, the day it ſelfe, the daye after the change of the Moone.
                        Halfe a naturall day, that is 12. howres before, and as many howres after the quarters of the Moone.
                        A day before, and a day after the full of the Moone.
                        A daye before, and a day after the Coniunction, Quartile, or oppoſition of the Moone with Saturne, or Mars.
                        
                        A daye before the Coniunction of the Moone with Mercury, or Venus, or the head of the Dragon, or taile of the Dragon infortunate: beſide other infortunate dayes in euery moneth, ſeuerally noted in euery Almanack: and expreſſely ſet downe in certaine olde Latine verſes to be ſeene in many auncient Calenders: which kind of verſes for the matter commonly are currant enough.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  and then the conuenienteſt time of the moneth, for the

                        
                           1. Sanguine.
                        
                           2. Chollerick.
                        
                           3. Melancholy.
                        
                           4. Phelgmatick
                     
the Moone being in

                        
                           1. Any of the ſignes following.
                        
                           2. Cancer, or Piſces.
                        
                        
                           3. Aquarius, & firſte halfe of Libra.
                        
                        
                           4. Aries or Sagittarius.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Ratio. Contraria contrarijs curantur.
                  Howbeit, ſome ſpecially commend Cancer, Aequarius, and Piſces, for letting of bloud: but Piſces can not be ſo good, being a common or bicorporall ſigne.
                  
                     alſo the beſt, and moſt laudable Aſpects for this purpoſe, or theſe, according to our ſoundeſt writers in this kind.

                           the coniunction of the Moone with Iupiter, or Venus, are ſimply and principally beſt: ſo that Venus be not combuſt.
                           the trine or ſextile of the Moone with Iupiter, Sol, Venus, and Mercury, are good, but eſpecially with Iupiter, or Mercury.
                           
                           the quartile or oppoſition of the Moone with Iupiter or Venus, doth well.
                           the trine or ſextile of the Moone with Mars, are reaſonable good, or indifferent.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     the time of the moneth for

                           Youth: from the chaunge to the firſt quarter.
                           Middle age: from the firſt quarter to the full.
                           Elderly age: from the full to the laſt quarter.
                           Olde age: from the laſt quarter to the chaunge.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Ratio. Simile gaudet ſuo ſimili.
                  Howbeit, no child would be let bloud before fourtéene yeares of age: nor old man after ſeuentie, vnleſſe his ſtrength be the greater, and ſomewhat more than ordinarie at thoſe yeares.
                  
                     5. Time of the day, and diet.
                     The time of the day muſt be either

                           Morning: after the riſing of the Sunne: when a man is yet faſting: which is ſimply the beſt, excepting the houres of Saturne and Mars: and chooſing ſpecially the houres of Iupiter, and Venus, whoſe nature is moſt temperate.
                           After none: after reaſonable good, or rather perfect digeſtion, and expulſion of ſuperfluities.
                        
                     
                  
                  And withall, regard muſt be had of the aier yt it be not either too hot, or too cold, or clowdie, but calme, cleare, and temperate: the winde being then either Northerly, or elſe, Weſterly: for the South wind is no friend to Phlebotomie.
               
               
                  Ratio. Callidum nimium diſſoluit: Frigidum nimium refrigerat.
                  Exception.
                  Notwithſtanding the premiſes, if this bloud letting be for the Phreneſie, the Peſtilence, the Squynancie, the Pleuriſie, the Apoplexie, for a continuing headach, procéeding

of choler or bloud, or for any hotte burning feuer, or other extreame paine, a man in ſuch a caſe may not tarie a choſen time, regularly ſet downe by the Aſtronomer, or Phiſitian, becauſe haply, the pacient might miſcarrie in the meane ſeaſon, but incontinently with all conuenient ſpéede, he is to ſéeke his remedie, this way: vnleſſe either him ſelfe be very weake, or like to ſounde, or the Moone be in the ſame ſigne that ruleth that verie parte of his bodie. Marrie, in the foreſayed caſe of extreamitie, bloud is not to be let in ſo great a quantitie, as otherwiſe it would, if a choſe time might conueniently be exſpected.
                  As before bloud letting theſe circumſtances of complexion, age, and times, are to be conſidered, ſo after bloud letting, like conſideration is to be had of our meates, and exerciſe. For meates we muſt take none, but ſutch as are of an eaſie, and light digeſtion.
                  
                     For exerciſe, we are to abſtaine from all, vntill the fourth day, excluſiue, not only thoſe, that be vehement, as,

                           riding.
                           running.
                           leaping.
                           vawting.
                           wraſtling.
                           fenſing.
                           tenniſe, &c.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     But alſo, ſuch as are more mild: as

                           walking.
                           bowling.
                           bathing.
                           and ſpecially venerie.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Which both antecedent, and conſequent limitations, being duely & orderly obſerued, I doubt not, but I may effectually conclude with that auncient commendation of Phlebotomie, giuen out in two common verſes.
                  
                     Exhilarat tristes: iratos placat: amantes
                     Ne ſint amentes, Phlebotomia facit.
                  
                  And thus much, or rather thus litle of Phlebotomie: hoping you will fauourably accept of this Aſtrological and Phiſicke table, togeather with the other rude papers: vntill better oportunitie, and greater leaſure, accompanied with more reading, ſhall afforde ſome péece of worke otherwiſe laboured, and more ſchollerly handled, than on ſuch a ſodaine this coulde be. Rome, they ſay, was not builded in a day, nor any worke of price huddled vp in haſt: euerie thing muſt haue a reaſonable time, and it is impoſſible for a beginner, or nouice in any facultie, to attaine vnto that perfection, which long experience, and much meditation, haue hardly bred in men of farre riper yeres, & greater ſtudie. The beſt is, I know vnto whō I write: and I truſte at my retourne, I ſhall finde you (as I haue alwaies) rather a gentle reformer, than a ſharpe controller. You know I vſe not to dote vpon mine owne errours, but as in all things elſe, ſo in this pamflet, am ready, to correct, or amend any thing that ſhall

be found amiſſe, being glad to holde the auncient rule, Errare poſſum, haereticus eſſe nolo, which I pray God, I may alwaies follow, as well in the concluſions of this ſcience, as of any other. But truly, brother, I feare me, I haue now bene too vnreaſonable tedious vnto you, and therefore wil here once againe take my leaue, and bid you hartily farewell: wiſhing you as my ſelfe. From my fathers in Walden the 6. of December. 1582.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Your louing brother, euer at commaundement, RICHARD HARVEY.
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
               AT LONDON: Imprinted by Henry Bynneman, with the aſſent of R. W.
            
         
      
   