
      
         
            
            
            A meruaylous ſtraunge deformed Swyne.
            
               
            
            
               
                  HEre Good Reader ſhalt thou beholde a ſtraunge and deformed Swyne, farowed and brought foorth in Denmarke, and there bought and brought ouer by an Engliſhman, which hath it at this preſent, & is to be ſeen a liue, the proportion wherof is wonderous ſtraunge to beholde and vew: the forepart therof from the Snoute beneath the fore ſhoulders are in al pointes like vnto a Swine, except the Eares only, which reſemble ye eares of a Lion, the hinder parte (contrarie to kinde) is proportioned in all pointes like vnto a Ram, hauing ſofte wooll both white and blacke mixed monge the hard Heare, and ſo groweth from the ſhoulders downe warde, all the body ouer, and it is a Boare Pyg, how beit, there doth nothing appeare outwarde, but onely the Pyſell vnder his Belly, but if a man liſt to feele & gripe it in the Grindes, there ye may feele his Coddes within his belly: and the moſt ſtraungeſt thinge of all, is the miſſhapen and deformed Feete, wheron grow certayne Tallents and very harde Clawes, doubling vnder his Feete, euery Claw ſo byg as a mans Fynger, and blacke of colour, and the length of euery of them are full. x. inches, very ſtraunge and wonderfull to beholde, it feedeth and eateth diuers and ſundrie thinges, aſwell Haye and Graſſe, as Breade and Apples, with ſuch other thinges as ſheepe and Swyne do feede on.
            
               ¶An exhortacion or warnynge to all men, for amendment of lyfe.
               COme néere good Chriſtians all,
               beholde a Monſter rare:
               Whoſe monſtrous ſhape (no doubt) fortels
               Gods wrath we ſhould beware.
               His wondrous works we ought not iudge,
               as toyes and trifles vaine:
               Whither it be Childe or brutiſh Beaſt,
               for warnings they are playne.
               As now, this mingled brutiſh Beaſt,
               Gods creature is we ſee:
               Although as ſtraunge of ſhape and forme
               as poſſyblie may be.
               For if you do way well ech poynt,
               his nature and his ſhape
               I feare reſembles ſome of thoſe,
               as on the ſame do gape.
               For why moſt Swiniſh are our liues,
               and monſtrous (that is ſure:)
               Though we reſemble ſimple Shéepe,
               or Lambes that be moſt pure.
               But euery Trée it ſelfe will try,
               at laſt by his owne Fruite:
               Though on our Backs we cary Woll,
               our conſcience is pollute,
               Though ſmilingly with flattering face,
               we ſeeme Gods word to loue:
               Contrary wiſe ſom hate the ſame,
               as well their déedes did prooue.
               Who ment the ruine of our Realme,
               as Traytours to our Quéene:
               Som white faſte Lābs haue ſought to do
               (nay, monſtrous Swine) I weene.
               I meane not here at large to ſhowe
               offences as they bee:
               In whom they raigne, in hie or low,
               I name here no degrée.
               But generally, I ſay to all,
               repent amend your life:
               The gréedy rich, the néedy poore,
               yea, yongman, Maide, and Wife.
               The Proteſtant, the Papiſt eke,
               what ſecte ſo that ye be,
               Gripe your own conſcience, learne to do
               as God commaundeth ye.
               For all are ſinners Dauid ſaith,
               Yea, do the beſt we may,
               Vnprofitable ſeruaunts ſtill we be,
               we can it not denay.
               Iudge ye therfore how far amiſſe,
               all thoſe their liues do frame:
               That outwardly profeſſe Gods truth,
               and inward hate the ſame.
               Iudge ye againe that hate your Prince,
               and ſéeke the Realme to ſpoyle:
               What monſtrous Swine you proue at length,
               for all your couert coyle.
               Experience late by Felton falſe,
               and Nortons two I wéene:
               Their Treaſon known were wōdred at
               as they had Monſters béen.
               And ſurely I can iudge no leſſe,
               but that they Monſters were:
               Quite changed from true ſubiects ſhape,
               their déedes did ſo appere.
               Then let their déedes example be,
               to vs that Subiects are:
               For treaſon ends by ſhamfull death,
               therfore by them beware.
               I ſpeake not here of monſtrous Pride,
               in Man, in Mayde, and Wife:
               Nor Whoordom which is daily vſde,
               in England ranke and rife.
               Of Couetouſneſſe, what ſhould I ſay,
               or Vſery daily don:
               It booteth not to ſpeake therof,
               ſo much therby is wonne.
               But if they well do count their Cardes,
               how God they do offend:
               I wis their ſwéete ill gotten gaines,
               hath ſowre and bitter end,
               From the which end deliuer vs Lord,
               and graunt both hie and low,
               To become thy ſeruaunts iuſt and true
               and then our end we know.
               God grant our gracious ſouerain Quéen
               long ouer vs may raigne:
               And this life paſt, with Chriſt our Lord,
               Heauens ioyes ſhe may attaine.
               
                  I. P.
               
               FINIS
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London by VVilliam Hovv, for Richard Iohnes: and are to be ſolde at his Shop ioyning to the Southweſt doore of Paules Churche.
            
         
      
   