
      
         
            
            
            A Table of good Nurture: Wherin is contained a Schoole-maſters admonition to his Schollers to learne good manners the Father to his Children to learne vertue: and the Houſ-houlder to his Seruants to learne godlineſſe.
            To the tune of, The Earle of Bedford.
            
            
               
            
            
               GOod Children, refuſe not theſe leſſons to learne,
               The path-way to vertue you here may diſcerne,
               In kéeping them liuely, you ſhall be moſt ſure,
               The praiſe of all people thereby to procure.
            
            
               Let God firſt be ſerued, who all things doth giue,
               That by his good bleſſing thou long time maiſt liue:
               And then to try Parents thy duty vnfold,
               Who keepeth thee daily from hunger and cold.
            
            
               To all men be courteous, yea and mannerly both,
               For feare leſt thy betters thy preſence doe loath:
               For youth without manners no man can abide,
               Much like a poore Begger poſſeſſed with pride.
            
            
               Thy garments vnbutton's delight not to weare,
               L
                     •
                  ſt ſl
                     •
                  uenly nick-name fall vnto they ſhare:
               Thy Hoſe vngartered deſerueth like ſhame,
               Whereby thou wi
                     ••
                   purchaſe thy Tutor much blame.
            
            
               Be comely and decent in all thy array,
               Not wantonly giuen to ſport and to play:
               But labour by vertue, in youth to obtaine
               The loue of thy betters, their friendſhip to gaine,
            
            
               I likewiſe command thee this leſſon to keepe,
               No longer than due time delight not to fleepe;
               Leſt ſloath in thy boſome ſuch harbour doe finde,
               As will cauſe thee be tearmed a ſluggerd by kind,
            
            
               The morning appearing riſe thou with ſpeed,
               Waſh hands and face cleanely before thou goe feed,
               Let ſhooes be faſt tyed both cloſe to thy feet
               The better to trauell all day in the ſtreet.
            
            
               Thy ſhirt-band moſt comely about thy necke weare,
               Haue handkerchiefe likewiſe both cleanely and faire:
               With hat ready bruſhed, that people may ſay,
               There goes a child cleanely in all his array.
            
            
               Goe neuer vntruſſed, for feare of the cold,
               For it doth indanger both the yong and old,
               Thy Girdle forget not, I put thee in minde,
               No Girdle, no bleſſing that day thou ſhalt finde.
            
            
               If thou be a Scholler, to Schoole make good haſte,
               For he is a Truant that commeth there laſt,
               For if thou doſt loyter and play by the way,
               Be ſure with thy Maſter it will cauſe a fray.
            
            
               But being their placed, I charge thee to looke
               Thou loſe not thy Inkehorne, thy Pen, nor thy booke▪
               
               Thy Garters, they Girdle, thy band, nor thy Hat.
               For feare left thy Parents be grieued thereat.
            
            
               Sweare not, nor curſe not, delight not to ſteale,
               Thy maſter obey thou, his ſecrets conceale,
               Take heed of falſe lying, ſet no man at ſtrife,
               Nor be thou too deſperate to ſtrike with a knife.
            
            
               Amongſt thy Companions be Gentle and kinde,
               If that thou their fauours doſt looke for to finde.
               For gentleneſſe gaineth thee loue from a foe,
               And getteth thee glory whereeuer thou goe.
            
            
               Play not, nor laugh not, thy Maſter to fret,
               When thou amongſt Schollers art orderly ſet,
               For ſilence is vertue, and vertue is grace,
               Which ought to be vſed, thy betters in place.
            
            
               Thus you good Children and Schollers each one,
               Here in good order you follies are ſhowne:
               In following theſe precepts you purchaſe alwaies,
               The loue of your Parents, and Schoole-maſters praiſe
            
            
               But if that in idleneſſe you doe delight,
               Refuſing theſe Leſſons here plainely in ſight,
               Looke for no kindneſſe no fauour nor loue,
               But your Maſters diſpleaſure, if you him moue.
            
            
               Therefore be wary you doe not offend,
               Your Parents, your Maſter, nor iniure your friend,
               Leſt ſtripes doe reward you, and make you to ſay,
               Your Precepts Ile follow, your words Ile obey.
            
            
               And now to conclude beare this well in mind,
               A diligent Scholler much fauour ſhall finde:
               But ſuch as will loyter, and lazie will be,
               Shall for their labour be brought on their knée,
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
            The ſecond Table of good Nurture;
            To the tune of, Troy Towne.
            
            
               
            
            
               THen learne to honour God aright,
               let loue and feare thereto prouoke:
               Obey thy Prince with all thy might,
               ſubmit they ſelfe to prudence yoke.
               Imbrace the good, eſchew the ill,
               This is the ſumme of wiſdomes skill.
            
            
               To know thy ſelfe doe thou apply,
               firſt trye thy friend before thou truſt:
               Loue him that dealeth faithfully,
               let word and deed be alwaes iuſt,
               Striue not to ſwim againſt the ſtreame,
               Account not of a drouſie dreame.
            
            
               Faint not though fortune fauoure fooles,
               fret not at others good ſucceſſe:
               Delight to ſit in learned Schooles.
               thy former faults ſeeke to redreſſe.
               Spurne not at him that tels thy crime,
               Mend it againſt another time.
            
            
               Acquaint thy ſelfe with ſome graue man
               marke well his talke and trade of life
               His word of wit ſee that thou ſcan,
               within thy mouth let them be rife.
               Deſire to imitate his trade,
               By vſe like him thou ſhalt be made.
            
            
               Wiſh for no wealth by parents death,
               a friend farre paſſeth worldly good:
               And whilſt the body yeeldeth breath,
               ſeeke not for to exceed in food.
               For great exceſſe of meat and drinke,
               Will cauſe thy ſoule in ſinne to ſinke.
            
            
               If fortune ſmile be not too proue,
               for why ſhe hath a frowning face:
               If in her loue they ſelfe thou ſhrowd,
               make much of her while thou haſt ſpace
               Her whirling wheele doth turne full oft,
               Some lye full low, ſome fleete aloft.
            
            
               Thinke not thine owne wit to be beſt.
               keepe not the crew of cogging mates,
               To ſweare and lye doe thou deteſt,
               for thereby credit oft abates.
               Beware of brazen face paſt ſhame,
               And loue to liue in honeſt fame.
            
            
               Where too much curteſie is vſed,
               take heed of frawd and ſubile guile,
               Good nature oft times is abuſed,
               in ſimple ſight with ſubtle wile,
               When all is ſaid and all is done,
               Yet craft lyes vnder clowted ſhoone.
            
            
               Report not on the preſent time,
               but marke alſo what may enſue,
               For cracke of credit is a crime,
               change not an old friend for a new;
               The ſecret councell of thy heart,
               Take heed to whom thou doſt impart,
            
            
               Praiſe no man till thou doe him know,
               diſpraiſe not raſhly any wight
               Leſt ſhame thereby to thee may grow,
               faire words are beſt place thing aright
               To wiſdomes ſchoole thus muſt thou go,
               And ſay experience taught thee ſo.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Printed at London for H. G.
         
      
   