
      
         
            
            
            ¶A mery balade, how a wife entreated her Huſband, to haue her owne wyll.
            
               
                  IN May when floures ſwetely ſmel
               The people romyng abrode ful ryfe
               A mery tale I ſhal you tel
               yt then was herd, but no great ſtrife
               In cloſe, a yong man and his wife
               Sate reaſonyng ſore, but for none yl,
               She ſaid, I am wery of this lyfe
               Good huſband let me haue mine owne will.
            
            
               ¶Wyfe (quoth he) then muſt I nedes know
               What is your wyll then for to haue,
               At me you muſt neither mocke nor mow
               Nor yet loute me, nor call me knaue:
               Nor VENVS game vpon me craue
               Nor yet your honeſtye for to ſpill,
               And make me neyther boy nor ſlaue
               But do good, and therin take your owne wyl.
            
            
               ¶Tuſh (quoth ſhe) ſir as for that
               I wyll be honeſt, to dye therefore,
               But huſband huſband, wot ye what?
               I haue bene your wyfe this month and more:
               And haue not gone but to the dore
               Such keping in, my heart doth ſpyll,
               By houſe kepers, neighbours ſet no ſtore
               Good huſband let me haue mine owne wyll.
            
            
               ¶Wyfe (quoth he) be you content
               You ſhall to Church and to market go,
               And to neighbours to, at time conuenient
               But not to goſſip, the truth is ſo:
               Tauernes to haunt? no wyfe, no no
               Nor yet alehouſes, with Iacke nor Gyll,
               You know my mynd for friend or fo
               Doe good, and therein take your owne wyll.
            
            
               ¶Huſband (quoth ſhe) you be to blame
               To kepe me in, and ſo playne withall,
               Me thinke I ſhuld be a fyne dame
               Whereby great prayſe to you might fall:
               I being fayre, nice, and ſmall
               Yf I had gay clothes my body to hyll,
               Then gentlewomen for me wold call
               Good huſband let me haue myne owne wyll.
            
            
               ¶No wyfe (quoth he) it wyll not be borne
               For you to go fyne, and gayly clad,
               To go as I will haue you, thinke ye no ſcorne
               That is, comely and cleane, ſober and ſad:
               Wherefore, be you neyther ſicke nor yet mad
               Becauſe ye may not your mynd fulfyll,
               For your deſyre is wicked and bad
               Doe good, and therein take your owne wyll.
            
            
               ¶Not mad (quoth ſhe) alas good man
               What woman culd your wordes abyde?
               I entreatyng you, as fayre as I can
               And yet my wordes you ſet aſyde:
               Though I be fayre, I loue no pryde
               For I ſerue your ſwyne with draffe and ſwyl,
               Vnto my friendes I wold fayne ryde
               Good huſband let me haue myne owne wyll.
            
            
               ¶Wyfe (quoth he) what nedeth all this?
               You craue a great deale more then neede,
               Your friendes haue no need of vs I wis
               Wherefore be ſtayed good gentle Beede:
               Now let vs plow, and ſow our ſeede
               Our wynter land is yet to tyll,
               How to thryue, let vs firſt take heede
               And do good, and therin take your owne wyl.
            
            
               ¶Oh huſband (quoth ſhe) I am but yong
               Wherefore I pray you graunt me one thyng,
               At libertie let me haue my toung
               Eyther to chyde, or els to ſyng:
               To daunce, to kyſſe, not ouer workyng
               But once a weke to go to myll,
               My time is ſhort, my death is cumming
               Good huſband let me haue mine owne wyll.
            
            
               ¶No wyfe (quoth he) I am your head
               Wherefore I pray you, my counſell take,
               And let ſuch tricks in you be dead
               Leaſt that for it, your bones doe ake:
               Therefore learne betime to brue and bake
               And liue no longer in ydleneſſe ſtyll,
               Wherefore for your owne eaſe ſake
               Doe good, and therein take your owne wyll.
            
            
               ¶Alas (quoth ſhe) what chaunce haue I
               To couple my ſelfe with ſuch a one,
               That had rather to ſee me dye
               Then to decke me gay, as I wold haue gone:
               To chyde, nor ſyng, nor to daunce alone
               I wold I had maried Iohn Gooſe quyll,
               Then nede I not to haue made this mone
               For by him, I might haue had all my wyll.
            
            
               ¶No more of theſe twayne culd be hard
               But home they went together playne,
               But let no wyues, this wyfe regard
               For her requeſt was all in vayne:
               And yet with ſhrewes ſome men take payne
               And abydeth the iob of the Deuylles byll,
               From the which all good wyues refrayne
               God geue vs all grace to doe his wyll. Amen.
            
            ¶FINIS.
            
            quod T. VV. T.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London by Alexander Lacy.
            
               
            
         
      
   