
      
         
            
            
            The ſecond part of the Widdow of Watling-ſtreete, and her three Daughters.
            To the tune of The Wanton wife.
            THe beautifull Widdow of Watling ſtreete,
            being thus falſly accuſde by her ſonne:
            With her three daughters of fauor ſo ſweet,
            Whoſe beauty the loue of ſo many had wonne,
            With her daughters three for ſuccour went ſhe,
            Vnto the kings counſaile of Noble degree,
            
               Now fie vpon falſhood and forgerie fraile,
            
            
               For great is the truth and it ſhall preuaile.
            
            ¶Her ſonne by a writ now ſommoned is,
            At the Starchamber with ſpeed to appeare:
            To anſwere there the abuſes of his,
            The Lords of the counſel the matter will heare:
            This news was brought his wits he ſought,
            Which may his villanie beſt might be wrought.
            ¶Then vp and downe the Citty ſo faire,
            He ſeeketh companions to ſerue his turne:
            A ſort of vacabonds naked and bare,
            the which to worke murders for money is won:
            Theſe wretches behold for money and golde:
            He hired for witneſſe his lyes to vphold, &c.
            ¶My maiſters quoth he, my mother by name,
            To be a lewd ſtrumpet accuſed I haue:
            And hauing no witneſſe to proue that ſame,
            Your ayde and aſſiſtance herein I do craue:
            Therefore without feare, before the Lords there
            yet this thing is certaine, you fixe ſhall it ſweare.
            ¶The firſt two quoth he, ſhal ſweare on a booke
            That ſixteene yeares paſt they plainely did ſee,
            As they through the gardē hedge ſadly did looke
            That ſhe in one houre was abuſed by three:
            And how it feel, as they markt it wel:
            That iuſt nine Moneths after ſhe had hir firſt girle
            ¶The ſecond couple ſhall ſweare in this ſort,
            That at Briſtow faire about xvii. yeares paſt,
            She wt her owne apprentiſe did fal in ſuch ſport
            That her ſecond daughter was got at the laſt,
            now truſt vs qd. they weele ſweare what you ſay,
            Or any thing elſe for money this day, &c.
            And thus ye third couple their oath now that take
            That as a
                  •
               t he Bath ſhe ſtaid on a day.
            For ach in her bones as the ſcuſe ſhe did make,
            How ſhe with a Courtier the wanton did play:
            And how well you wot in the pleaſant plot,
            her deareſt yong daughter for certaine was got,
            But now you maſters your names let me know:
            That I may prouide you apparell with ſpeed,
            Like ſixe graue Cittizens ſo muſt you go,
            The better your ſpeeches the Lords will heed,
            So ſhal I with ſcorne, ere Saturday morne,
            Prove her a Harlot, my ſiſters baſe borne, &c.
            ¶My name is make ſhift, the firſt man did ſay,
            And Francis light-finger the ſecond likewiſe,
            Cutbert creepe-window the third to diſplay;
            And Rowland Rob-man, wt foule ſtaring eyes:
            Iack ſhameles comes then wt Hary ſteale-hen,
            You are qd. the widdow ſome right honeſt men.
            ¶Before the Lords moſt prudent and graue,
            This wretch doth with his witneſſe come:
            The mother complains & Iuſtice doth craue,
            Of all the offences that he hath her done:
            My Lords then qd. ſhe, I pray you heare me,
            The Law for my deeds my warrant ſhall be.
            I ſay ſhe is a Harlot moſt vilde,
            And thoſe be her baſtards that ſtandeth is place,
            And that ſhe hath often her body defilde,
            By very good witnes ile proue to her face:
            This thing of thy Mother yu oughtſt for to ſmother
            Tis ſhame for a child to ſpeake of his Mother.
            ¶ But if this matter be proued vntrue,
            And thou a falſe lyar be found to thy face:
            Worſe then an Infidell, Pagon, or Iew,
            Thou oughtſt to be puniſht & plagd in this caſe,
            And therefore draw neere, and now let vs heare,
            What ſaies the witnes that here doth appeare?
            ¶When the firſt couple did come for to ſweare
            They quiuerd and quakt in moſt wondrous ſort,
            The lords very coūtenance did put them in feare
            And now they knew not what to report:
            The ſecond likewiſe ſtard ſo with his eyes,
            They ſtamberd and knew not what to deuiſe.
            ¶ The Lords perceiuing the caſe how it went,
            Did aſke the laſt couple what they had to ſay,
            Who fell on their knees incontinent,
            Saying they were hir'd for mony that day:
            Quoth they it is ſo, the truth for to ſhow,
            Againſt a good widow no harme we do know.
            ¶Thus was the widow deliuered from blame,
            With her three daughters of beauty moſt bright
            Her ſonne reproached with ſorrow and ſhame,
            Hauing his iudgment appointed him right:
            To looſe at the leaſt the goods he poſſeſt,
            To looſe both his eares, and baniſht to reſt.
            When he heard this iudgment pronoūced to be
            The teares full bitterly fell down from his face,
            To mother and ſiſters he kneeled on his knee,
            Confeſſing yt Lucre had wrought his diſgrace,
            That for my own gaine, I ſought to detaine,
            My ſiſters three portions this lye I did faine,
            Therefore deare Mother forgiuenes I craue,
            Of you and my ſiſters offended ſo ſore:
            My body from perill if you will but ſaue,
            I ſweare I will grieue and offend you no more,
            The Lords then replide, the Law iuſtly tride,
            the puniſhment now thou are like to abide,
            ¶Therefore to priſon now thou ſhalt go,
            Where thou ſhalt the kings pleaſure abide,
            From thence to be brought wt ſhame & with wo,
            To ſuffer the puniſhment due to thy pride:
            Then out of hand, thou ſhalt vnderſtand,
            That preſently thou ſhalt be baniſht the land.
            ¶Now while in priſon this priſoner did reſt
            Himſelfe he hanged in deſperate wiſe:
            Such horror of conſcience poſſeſſed his breſt,
            & being caſt forth, the Rauens pickt out his eies
            All children behold, what here hath bin tolde,
            Accuſe no man falſly for lucre of golde.
            
               Now fie vpon falſhood, and forgerie fraile,
            
            
               For great is the truth, and it will preuaile.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London for T. P.
         
      
   