
      
         
            
            
            A warnyng to Englan
                  •
               , let London begin: To repent their iniquitie, & flie from their ſin.
            
            
               
                  
                     ¶ ISAIE. 1.
                  
                  ¶ The Ore knoweth his owner, and the Aſſe his maſters crib, but Iſraell hath not knowen: my people hath not vnderſtand. Ah, ſinfull nation, a people laden with iniquitie: a ſéede of the wicked, corrupt chyldren: they haue forſaken the Lorde, they haue prouoked the holy one of Iſraell to anger: they are turned backewarde.
               
            
            
               OH Endland be vigilant, and repent thee with ſpede,
               And marke well the myrours of thy viſitation:
               Prepare thee to prayer, for it was neuer more neede,
               And lang wiſh for thy lewde life, with great lamētation.
            
            
               ¶ When God drowned the worlde in the dayes of Noye,
               for that ſin onely (I ſaye) which we dayly do frequent:
               He ſent Noye to preach to them, or he dyd them deſtroye,
               And gaue them ſixe ſcore yeares, a ſpace for to repent.
            
            
               ¶ Zodome and Gomorra alſo, were ſunke in fyre ful hot,
               Burnyng all in Brimſtone, vntyll they were deſtroyed:
               And yet they were fore warned long▪ by the prophete Lot,
               VVith Repentance vnto them, continually he cryed.
            
            
               
                  ❧ But that happye citie Niniuie, among all the reſt,
               They heard Ionas his preachyng whē he came thither:
               Repentyng ſtraight wayes, and of GOD they were bleſt,
               A goodly myrour to LONDON, yf they wolde conſider.
            
            
               ¶ O London, London, Ieruſalem I may thee call,
               for whye▪ thy conuerſation agreeth thereto now:
               They wolde take no warnyng before the plague did fall,
               And at this preſēt day O LONDON, nomore doeſt thou.
            
            
               ¶ VVhat tokens haue bene of late, of Gods feareful yre?
               The lyke before was neuer ſeene, in no time (I trowe)
               Thy cheef and beautifull Temple was defaced with tyre,
               A goodly admonition ſure (yf thou couldeſt it knowe)
            
            
               ¶ Neither coulde the Peſtilence prouoke vs to repent,
               Nor cruell warres warne vs that the end is at hand:
               No, we mocke at Gods threatnigs lyke beaſts impudent,
               No doubt, Gods iuſtice muſt needes plague the lande.
            
            
               ¶ For we wyll not repent, nor our wicked lyues amend,
               But continue ſtyll in wickednes, procuring Gods curſe:
               VVhat earneſt preachers doth the Lorde vs dayly ſend?
               It is but pearles before ſwyne, for we at wurſe & wurſe.
            
            
               ¶ If a man rebuke drunkennes, ſwearyng or blaſphemie,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   ſhall in this wyſe be mocked of one iabell or an other:
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   is good godly man, 
                     〈◊〉
                   toe holy for our companie,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   ar a preciſian I 
                     〈…〉
                   ſome vnſpotted brother.
            
            
               ¶ Alas, is this your repentance after ſo long preachyng?
               I pray you read the xii. chap. of S. Mathe wes goſpell:
               Chriſt ſaith, of euery idle worde we ſhal geue a reconyng,
               Then ſweaters and blaſphemers, ſhal be puniſhed in hell.
            
            
               Deare chriſtians, conſider our ſtate this preſent yeare,
               Both wt war and other plagues, we are round encloſed:
               Let vs turne to the Lorde our God wt tremblyng & feare,
               With harty thankes geuyng for his great mercies offred.
            
            
               ¶ Remember the .x. Lepers, in the .xvii. of Luke certaine,
               When the Lorde had clēſed them of their ſore infirmitie:
               One poore Samaritane come to Ieſus Chriſt agayne,
               To geue him hartie thankes for his great benignitie.
            
            
               ¶ So let vs geue thanks to God in hart both al & ſome,
               A
                     •
                  d repent our former liues, without any longer delay:
               
                  
                     •
                  word 
                     •••
                  eare leſt a greuous plague among vs haſtely come,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     ••
                  ithout ſpeedye repentance, looke for it we may.
            
            
               Bryng forth the frutes of the goſpel, I meane a godly life,
               Leaue your filty hipocriſie which ſtinketh in Gods ſight
               Leaue your abominable pryde, amend both man & wyfe,
               Leaue your horrible blaſphemie wherein you ſo delight.
            
            
               Pray England pray, and London leaue thy wicked trade,
               Eſpeciallye Couetouſnes, Glotonie, and al fylthy luſt:
               And remember our merciful God who hath vs all made,
               A body that is mor
                     •
                  all, and ſhall turne to duſt.
            
            
               ¶ For our noble queene Elizabeth, let vs al harte
                     ••••
                  
               
               And for her honorable counſell, that God geue th
                     •
                  
               
               To maintayne his glorious Goſpell both night 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               To the advancement of Vertue, all wickednes to 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
            
            
               ꝙ William Birch
            
            ¶ FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London, in little Britaine: by Alexander Lacie.
         
      
   